
  _The New Cookery Books_

  III

  The Pudding and Pastry Book




  THE
  NEW COOKERY BOOKS.

  By ELIZABETH DOUGLAS.

  Fcap. 8vo, cloth, Cover designed,
  2s. each.

  I.

  THE SOUP AND SAUCE BOOK.

  II.

  THE CAKE AND BISCUIT BOOK.

  III.

  THE PUDDING AND PASTRY BOOK.




  The Pudding
  and Pastry Book

  By
  Elizabeth Douglas

  [Illustration]

  London
  Grant Richards
  48 Leicester Square




Preface


The following pages naturally contain only a brief selection from the
thousands of sweets which exist; they have been chosen with an eye to
dainty quality, and to simplicity, and every receipt has been tested.

Three words concerning sweets: French white fire-proof dishes are
better for baking puddings than the ordinary English culinary utensils;
small cups or glasses are more charming receptacles for jellies, creams
and custards than large dishes; and the magic properties of salt (even
in the preparation of sweets) cannot be too much insisted upon, the
deprecatory English cook to the contrary.

  E. D.




Table of Contents


                                              PAGE

  General Directions                           1-5

  Milk Puddings                               7-12

  Boiled Custards                            15-17

  Baked Custards                             20-24

  Fruit Dishes                               26-34

  Pancakes                                   37-39

  Fritters                                   41-47

  Omelets                                    49-52

  Baked Soufflés                             55-58

  Soufflé Puddings                           61-64

  Hot Puddings                               66-77

  Sauces                                     80-87

  Jellies                                    89-96

  Creams                                    97-108

  Cold Puddings                            110-121

  Pastry                                   123-127

  Open Tarts and Tartlets                  129-134

  American Pies                            137-141

  Cream Ices                               142-149

  Water Ices                               151-155

  Iced Puddings, Mousses, Parfaits, etc.   157-162

  Sugars                                   164-165




General Directions


_Measuring._--Flour, sugar, salt, ground spices, should always be
sifted before measuring.

A cup is a breakfast-cup holding half a pint. The spoons are the silver
ones in general use.

A spoonful of dry material is one in which the convexity at the top
corresponds to the concavity of the spoon. A scant spoonful should be
made level with the edges of the spoon.

In measuring half a tea-spoon of dry material, fill it first, and then
divide it with a knife the length of the spoon.

It is necessary to remember in measuring half or quarter cups that a
cup is smaller at the bottom than the top. It is most satisfactory to
have half-pint measures which are marked into quarters.

_Table of Measures_

  4 cups flour = 1 quart or 1 lb.
  2 cups of butter (solid) = 1 lb.
  2¹⁄₂ cups powdered sugar = 1 lb.
  1 cup = ¹⁄₂ pint
  1 glass = ¹⁄₂ pint
  1 pint milk or water = 1 lb.
  9 large eggs = 1 lb.
  1 table-spoon butter = 1 oz.
  1 heaping table-spoon butter = 2 ozs.
  Butter the size of an egg = 2 ozs.

_To clean currants._--Sprinkle the currants with flour, put them on a
coarse sieve, and rub them until the stems and grit are separated and
go through the sieve. Then wash thoroughly in water, changing it until
clear. Drain on a towel and pick over. Dry, if the weather permits, in
the _sun_, not in an oven.

_To stone raisins._--Pour boiling water over the raisins, and let them
stand in it for ten minutes. Drain and rub each raisin between finger
and thumb till the seeds come out. Cut open or chop.

_Sultanas._--Pick over sultanas carefully, removing the little stems.

_To chop suet._--Sprinkle the suet with flour. Chop in a cold place,
removing all membrane carefully.

_To boil puddings._--Pour the pudding mixture into a well-buttered
basin, leaving room for it to swell or rise. Take a perfectly clean
cloth, dip it in boiling water, and flour plentifully inside where it
covers the pudding. Tie it up tightly round the basin. Stand in boiling
water. Do not let the water stop boiling for an instant until the
pudding is done. If it boils away, renew with fresh boiling water.

_To steam puddings._--Cover the basin (which should be buttered) with
buttered paper. Set in a covered steamer over boiling water. Keep the
water boiling hard.

_Bain-marie._--Bain-maries can be bought, but a saucepan placed upon a
trivet in a larger saucepan containing hot water does equally well.

_Gelatine._--Gelatine should always be soaked in _cold_ water for one
or two hours before using. Then it should be dissolved in a very little
hot water, unless otherwise specified, and strained.

The greatest care must be taken in adding liquid gelatine to a cold
mixture, as it so quickly solidifies. Strain it first, and then very
gradually add it to the mixture, beating hard all the time.

_To whip cream._--Whip cream in as cold a place as possible. It will
whip easiest if it has been kept on ice for two or three hours. While
whipping, remove the froth as it comes on to a sieve to drain. The
liquid cream which drains off can be returned to the basin and whipped
again. Sugar can be added before or after whipping. The cream will be
lighter if the sugar is whipped with it.

_To melt chocolate._--Put the chocolate in a saucepan on the oven when
the heat is very moderate. Watch that it does not burn.

_Meringue for puddings._--To make a meringue to cover a pudding, beat
several whites of egg until frothy but not stiff. Then add the sugar
gradually in the proportion of one table-spoon of powdered sugar to
each white. Beat till stiff. Spread over the pudding when it is cool.
Put in a moderate oven, and take out as soon as the meringue has risen,
and is delicately browned. Serve quickly.

_To blanch almonds._--Put the almonds into boiling water and let them
soak in it until the skins rub off easily between the finger and thumb.
Drain and spread out to dry.

_To pound almonds._--After blanching let them soak for an hour in cold
water, then pound in a good sized mortar until reduced to a soft pulp.
Whilst pounding add a few drops of orange-flower water or lemon juice.

_Mixing._--There are three ways of mixing. Stirring, Beating, Cutting
(or Folding).

_To stir._--Let the spoon touch the bottom and sides of the basin, and
move it round quickly in circles of various sizes. Do not lift it out
of the mixture, and work well against the sides.

_To beat._--Tip the bowl to one side. Bring the spoon or fork quickly
down into the mixture and through it, take it out the other side and
bring it over and down again, scraping the sides well each time it goes
in.

It is important to keep the bowl of the spoon well scraped out during
mixing.

_To cut or fold._--Turn over the mixture with a spoon, lift it up,
folding in the white of egg as lightly as possible. Do not stir or beat
but mix very gently until quite blended.

_To beat butter._--Butter which is to be beaten should not be melted;
but it can be softened by being kept for a while in a warm place.

       *       *       *       *       *

To all sweets, with a few exceptions such as jellies, creams and
fruit dishes, salt should be added. It must be used carefully, since
the quantity required will necessarily vary. Salt is of the highest
importance in bringing out the full flavour of the ingredients used.
It can be added to flour or milk, or when the whites of eggs are used
it will serve a double purpose if added to them, as it makes them much
easier to beat up.




Milk Puddings


                          PAGE

  Apple Tapioca Pudding      7

  Bread and Butter Pudding   7

  Bread Pudding              8

  Gâteau de Riz              9

  Rice Cream                 9

  Rice Pudding              10

    ”    ”  with Raisins    10

  Rice Soufflé              11

  Tapioca Pudding--I.       11

    ”      ”       II.      12


Apple Tapioca Pudding

  1 teacup tapioca
  1¹⁄₂ pints warm water
  6 apples
  1 lemon
  1 tea-spoon butter
  1 cup milk
  1 cup powdered sugar

Soak the tapioca in the water. Add to it the butter, melted, a little
salt, half the sugar and the milk. Peel and core six sour apples,
filling them with the rest of the sugar with which the juice of half
a lemon and the grated peel of a whole lemon have been mixed. Put the
apples into a deep pudding-dish. Pour the tapioca and milk round them.
Bake an hour.

This pudding may be made with plums, gooseberries or currants; they
should be well sweetened.


Bread and Butter Pudding

  Bread
  Butter
  Sultanas
  Powdered cinnamon
  3 eggs
  1 pint milk
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar

Cut a number of slices of bread, taking off the crusts and spreading
them with butter. Butter a pudding-dish and fill it three parts full
with the slices of bread and butter, sprinkling a little powdered
cinnamon and a few sultanas between each layer. Beat the sugar and
eggs together. Add the milk and flavouring. Strain. Pour slowly on the
bread, letting it absorb all it can. Bake in a moderate oven for an
hour.

A good variation of this pudding is made by spreading each layer of
bread and butter with jam.


*Bread Pudding

  1¹⁄₂ cups powdered sugar
  2 cups bread-crumbs
  1 quart milk
  5 eggs
  1 table-spoon butter
  Vanilla

Put the bread-crumbs, which should be very fine, to soak in the milk.
Mix the butter and one cup of sugar. Add the well-beaten yolks, and
beat well together. Add bread-crumbs and milk and a little vanilla.
Butter a pudding-dish and fill it not more than two-thirds full. Bake
in a moderate oven until set. Spread quickly with jelly or jam and
cover with the whites beaten to a froth and mixed with half a cup of
sugar. Put back in the oven to brown quickly. Serve cold with cream.

This pudding can be made with crushed and sweetened fresh strawberries
instead of jam.


Gâteau de Riz

  5 table-spoons rice
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar
  1 quart milk
  6 eggs
  Lemon peel
  1 bay leaf

Boil the rice and sugar in the milk, with a thin strip of lemon peel
and the bay leaf, very gently until all the milk is absorbed. When
cold, add four whole eggs and two extra yolks previously well beaten,
and two whites beaten to a stiff froth. Beat all well together. Butter
a mould, and sprinkle very fine bread-crumbs all over it. Pour in the
rice and bake for half-an-hour in a quick oven.

A small cup of strong coffee can be added while the rice is being
cooked, or a handful of candied cherries after the eggs have been added.


Rice Cream

  1 tea-cup rice
  1¹⁄₂ pints milk or 1 pint milk and ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Boil the rice in the milk (with a very little salt) until it is soft
and thick and all the milk is absorbed. Add the sugar when partly
cooked, and stir in the vanilla when the rice is done. Pour into small
moulds or cups. Leave till the following day. Serve cold with custard,
cream or cold fruit sauce.


*Plain Rice Pudding

  ¹⁄₂ cup rice
  ¹⁄₂ cup brown sugar
  1 quart milk
  A little salt

Let the rice soak for half-an-hour in the milk. Add the sugar. Bake
over two hours in a moderate oven.


Rice Pudding with Apples or Raisins

  3 table-spoons rice
  1 quart milk
  3 table-spoons brown sugar
  Salt
  3 sour apples
  Or 1 cup raisins or sultanas

Soak the rice in the milk for an hour. Add a little salt, the sugar,
the apples pared and cut into eighths, or the stoned raisins or
sultanas. Butter a deep pudding-dish and fill it, covering it with a
plate. Bake very slowly for four hours.


*Rice Soufflé

  ¹⁄₂ cup rice
  1 pint milk
  6 eggs
  6 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon butter
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Cook the rice for twenty minutes in a large sauce-pan of salted
boiling water. Drain it and cook it in the milk in a double-boiler
for ten minutes. Beat the yolks until light and creamy. Add the sugar
and softened butter. Stir the eggs, etc. into the rice and cook for
five minutes, but do not allow it to boil. Let it get cold. Beat well
together, add the vanilla, and lightly stir in the whites beaten to a
stiff froth. Bake in a buttered mould for half-an-hour. Serve with a
sauce.


Tapioca Pudding--I

  5 table-spoons tapioca
  1 quart milk
  1 table-spoon butter
  ¹⁄₂ cup brown sugar
  (3 eggs)

Soak the tapioca over night, or if this has not been done, let it
simmer for half-an-hour in water. Drain and add the milk, sugar,
melted butter and a little salt. Butter a dish and bake in a moderate
oven for an hour.

Three eggs and a little vanilla can be added. They should be thoroughly
well beaten and stirred into the milk.


*Tapioca Pudding--II

  1 breakfast-cup tapioca
  5 eggs
  1 quart milk
  1 cup powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Cover the tapioca with water and soak all night. Then boil it till
tender. Make a custard (see p. 15) of the five yolks, sugar and milk.
Drain the tapioca. Put it into a large basin, adding a very little
salt. Pour the custard over it and beat well together, adding the
vanilla. Whip the whites to a firm froth. Stir them lightly in. Butter
a pudding-dish and pour in the mixture. Set it in a pan of boiling
water in a very moderate oven. Cover it with a dish. Bake until the
custard becomes thick and a little set (it must not be as firm as a
baked custard). Brown with a salamander or set in a hot oven for a few
minutes.




Boiled Custards


                    PAGE

  Plain Custard       15

  Caramel Custard     15

  Chestnut Custard    16

  Chocolate Custard   16

  Coffee Custard      16

  Tapioca Custard     17




General Directions


In making custards it is of the utmost importance that they should not
be allowed to boil. They are best made in a porcelain double-boiler or
in a bain-marie (see p. 15).

Cooked white of egg may be added as a garnish to any custard. To
prepare it, beat the whites to a stiff froth, and either put it on a
sieve and steam it; or drop a tablespoonful at a time into boiling
milk, removing it with a skimmer as soon as firm. Whipped cream or
ratafias may also be used.


Plain Custard

  1 pint milk
  3 or 4 yolks of eggs
  3 tablespoons powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ teaspoon vanilla

Beat the yolks in a good sized basin until light and creamy. Add the
sugar and a very little salt. Scald the milk and pour it gradually over
the yolks, stirring constantly whilst doing so. Pour the custard back
into a double-boiler in the outer part of which is very hot water. Stir
continually until the custard thickens. When it is thick enough it will
coat the spoon. It must not boil or the custard will curdle. Strain at
once into a jug. Add the flavouring when cool.


Caramel Custard

Melt three table-spoons of powdered sugar in a saucepan and stir it
over a quick fire until it is a rich brown, being very careful that it
does not burn. Pour this into a basin and beat it well with three or
four yolks of eggs. Proceed as for plain custard (see above).


*Chestnut Custard

  1 lb. chestnuts
  4 eggs
  4 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 pint milk or cream
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Boil, peel and pound the chestnuts. Add the well beaten yolks, a little
salt and the sugar. Beat well together. Add the milk or cream. Beat the
whites to a stiff froth and add them gradually, stirring continually.
When well mixed, pour into a double boiler and stir until the custard
thickens. Add the vanilla when the custard is cool.


*Chocolate Custard

Add to one pint of milk three table-spoons of grated chocolate. Boil
until the chocolate is melted. Proceed as for plain custard (see p.
15). When cold stir in a gill of rich cream. Serve very cold.


*Coffee Custard

To a pint of plain custard (see p. 15) add a coffee cup of strong, good
coffee, and an extra table-spoon of powdered sugar. Omit the vanilla.


*Tapioca Custard

  2 table-spoons tapioca
  1 pint milk
  2 eggs
  ¹⁄₃ cup powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Soak the tapioca for two hours in hot water in a double-boiler. Drain.
Put back and add the milk. Cook until tender and clear. Carefully mix
with the tapioca the two yolks beaten well, the sugar and a little
salt. Cook until the custard thickens. Take off the fire and stir in
the whites beaten to a stiff froth. When cool add the vanilla. Serve
very cold.




Baked Custards


                          PAGE

  Baked Custard (plain)     20

  Caramel Custard           20

  Chocolate Custard         21

  Cocoanut Custard          22

  Coffee Custard            22

  Crème Brûlée              22

  Crème Renversée           23

  Lemon Custard             24




General Directions


The milk for baked custards should always be boiled.

It is of the greatest importance in baking custards to have a slow
oven. It is a good thing to leave the oven door a little open for a
short time.

It is best, although not necessary, to stand the dish of custard in
another containing hot water. The water should simmer.

Custards can also be cooked by placing them in a large saucepan
containing hot water, which should reach half-way up the mould or cups
used. The water should be brought to a boil. Then the saucepan should
be set back where it will simmer gently, and it should be covered. This
method takes about an hour. It is best to let the custard stay in the
water until it is cold.


Baked Custard (plain)

  6 yolks
  2 whites
  6 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 quart milk

Scald the milk. Beat the yolks and two whites together until light and
creamy. Add the sugar to them and a little salt. Beat again. Pour the
scalded milk over them slowly, stirring all the time. Strain into a
buttered pudding-dish or into small cups. Sprinkle with nutmeg. Bake in
a slow oven for forty minutes.


*Caramel Custard

  ¹⁄₂ cup sugar
  1 quart milk
  8 yolks
  2 whites
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Melt the sugar with a very little water in an iron saucepan. Stir it
over a quick fire until it is a rich brown, being very careful that it
does not burn. Beat the yolks and whites till light. Scald the milk.
Add the sugar to it and pour slowly on the eggs, stirring continually.
Add vanilla and a little salt. Strain into dish. Set the dish
containing custard inside another vessel in which there is hot water
and bake in a very slow oven for an hour. This custard is best the day
after it is made. It should be set but creamy, and not as stiff as the
ordinary plain, baked custard.


Chocolate Custard

  1 quart milk
  6 yolks
  1 cup powdered sugar
  3 ozs. grated chocolate
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Add the chocolate to the milk and boil until it is thoroughly
dissolved. Beat the yolks thoroughly. Add the sugar to them and beat
again. Pour the boiling milk and chocolate over the yolks and sugar,
stirring continually. Add the vanilla and strain into a pudding-dish.
Bake in a very slow oven for forty-five minutes to an hour. Serve very
cold.


*Cocoanut Custard

  ¹⁄₂ lb. grated fresh cocoanut
  ¹⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon rose-water
  Milk
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon powdered cinnamon
  2 yolks
  4 whites

If there is not half a pint of cocoanut milk, add to it cold milk until
there is that amount. Into this stir the sugar and rose-water. Stir in
the cream and well-beaten yolks. Beat the whites to a very stiff froth,
and add them alternately with the grated cocoanut and cinnamon. Bake in
cups set in hot water in a moderate oven.


Coffee Custard

Make as for chocolate custard, flavouring with a coffee-cup of good
strong coffee instead of chocolate, and adding another yolk.


*Crème Brûlée

  1 pint cream
  4 yolks

Scald the cream. Pour it slowly over the well-beaten yolks. Put the
cream in a double-boiler and stir until it thickens, but do not let it
boil. Pour into a shallow dish.

When it is cold sift powdered sugar thickly over it. Set in a _very_
slow oven for quarter of an hour. Take it out. Brown the sugar with a
salamander. Serve cold.


*Crème Renversée

  1³⁄₄ pints milk
  6 yolks
  3 whites
  6 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Beat the yolks and whites together. Add the sugar. Beat again. Pour
the scalded milk gently over the eggs, stirring continually. Add the
vanilla and a little salt.

Melt a quarter of a pound of sugar in an iron sauce-pan; stir it over a
quick fire until it is a rich brown. Plunge a mould into boiling water
and drain it quickly. Pour part of the prepared sugar into it at once,
coating the sides evenly with it. Strain the custard immediately into
the mould. Cover with a plate and set in a pan of boiling water in a
moderate oven. Bake until quite firm. This can be tested with a knife,
which should come out clean if the custard is done. When the custard is
cold, turn it carefully out of the mould and pour round it the rest of
the syrup, with which a little hot water should have been mixed.


Lemon Custard

  6 eggs
  2 lemons
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  1 wine-glass brandy
  1 stale sponge cake
  1 pint milk or cream
  2 ozs. butter

Into a basin put the yolks of the eggs. Beat them well. Add three
whites, the rinds of the lemons grated fine and the juice of one lemon.
Beat well again. Add the sugar, brandy, and sponge cake finely crushed.
Beat all together thoroughly. Add the cream and the butter, previously
softened, but not melted. Bake in small moulds in a quick oven for
half-an-hour.




Fruit Dishes


                          PAGE

  Baked Apples--I.          26

    ”     ”     II.         26

  Baked Bananas             26

  Flaming Peaches           27

  Grated Pine Apple         27

  Miroton                   27

  Rum Tutti Frutti          28

  Stewed Fruit              28

    ”    Apples             29

    ”    Figs               30

    ”    Peaches            30

    ”    Pears--I.          31

    ”      ”    II.         31

    ”      ” (White)        32

    ”    Prunes             32

  Strawberries and Cream    33

  Fruit Salads              33

  Orange Salad              34

    ” and Cocoanut Salad    34

  Pine Apple Salad          34


Baked Apples--I

Peel and core several good cooking apples. Butter on both sides as
many small slices of bread as you have apples. Fill the centre of each
apple with butter. Sprinkle thickly with sugar. Bake in a moderate oven
three-quarters of an hour. Baste five or six times with the juice and
butter, adding more butter if necessary. Serve hot, having filled the
centre of each apple with jelly.


Baked Apples--II

Peel and core several good cooking apples, and fill the hollow centres
with lemon sugar (see p. 164). Put a little water in the bottom of a
shallow tin. Set the apples in it close together. Bake in a quick oven,
basting often with the syrup formed by the water and sugar.


Baked Bananas

Skin several bananas and cut them lengthways in half. Place on a tin.
Sprinkle well with sugar, and put several small lumps of butter on
them. Bake twenty minutes in a moderate oven, basting occasionally and
adding a very little hot water if there is not sufficient juice with
which to baste.


Flaming Peaches

Peel several peaches, which should not be too ripe. Let them simmer for
five minutes in sweetened boiling water. Take them out and drain them.
Sprinkle with sugar. Pour sufficient lighted kirsch-wasser over the
peaches. The peaches must be kept very hot.


Grated Pine-Apple

Grate some pine-apple coarsely. To each pound of fruit add one pound of
sugar. Put into a large jar and stir occasionally. After twenty-four
hours put into glass jars and cover. This will keep for months.


Miroton

  4 pears
  1 table-spoon flour
  1 table-spoon butter
  1 wine-glass white wine
  Powdered sugar

Pare and core the pears. Cut into quarters, let them simmer for half an
hour in a little water and sugar. Melt the butter in a sauce-pan. Add
the flour. Work till perfectly smooth. Add the wine, and when hot, the
pears and juice. Simmer again for half an hour. Lay the pears on rounds
of fried bread. Strain the juice over them and serve hot.


*Rum Tutti Frutti

Put one quart of rum and three pounds powdered sugar in a large jar
which has an air-tight cover or cork. Leave for a week. Stir well. Put
into the jar three pounds of strawberries and three pounds more sugar.
Stir occasionally. After another week add three pounds raspberries
and three pounds sugar. Stir every day. Again, after an interval, add
apricots, peaches, plums, etc., always with an equal quantity of sugar.
The jar must be kept air-tight and should be kept in a cool dry place.
When it is full, put it away for several weeks. Then mix thoroughly and
serve with whipped cream.


Stewed Fruit

Fruit should be stewed in plenty of well-sweetened water until tender,
care being taken to keep it whole. When tender remove the fruit from
the saucepan. Place it in the dish in which it is to be served. To the
juice add a little thin lemon peel, a few drops of lemon juice, more
sugar if required, and, if liked, a glass of white wine. Set again on a
quick fire and reduce until thick. Strain this over the fruit and serve
when cold.


Stewed Apples

Peel and take out the core of several sound good cooking apples,
putting each when finished in water into which the juice of a lemon has
been squeezed. When they are all prepared arrange them in a saucepan,
covering them with water and adding sugar to sweeten thoroughly. Cook
quickly for about twenty minutes, taking care to keep them whole. Lift
out the apples. Place them on a glass dish. Add a little lemon juice
to the apple juice, more sugar if necessary, a few drops of cochineal
(and, if possible, the rind of a pine-apple). Boil quickly until
considerably reduced--and quite thick. Pour over the apples. Decorate
each apple with a little red currant jelly.


*Stewed Figs

  1 lb. dried figs
  1 pint water
  4 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 lemon
  1 wine-glass sherry

Put the figs, water, sugar and finely-pared lemon peel into an
enamelled saucepan. Stew gently until very tender. This will take from
two to three hours. Take out the figs and place them in a dish. Stir
into the juice the sherry and juice of a lemon. Strain over the fruit
and serve cold.


Stewed Peaches

  6 peaches
  5 ozs. powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ pint cold water
  1 table-spoon kirsch

Throw the peaches into boiling water to blanch. Take out and peel. Cut
into quarters, removing the stones. Put into cold water. Add the sugar.
Boil for five minutes, being careful not to break the fruit. Set the
fruit in a dish. Add the kirsch to the juice. Strain on to the fruit.


Stewed Pears--I

Pare, core and cut in half a number of good large cooking pears, and
put them into cold water in which there is the juice of a lemon. Prick
them in several places. Make a syrup in the proportion of one cup of
sugar to one cup of water. Boil up and skim. When cool pour it into an
earthenware jar. Put the pears into the syrup. Add two cloves. Cover
the jar tightly. Set in a very slow oven and leave for five or six
hours. This is the best way of cooking pears: but it is essential that
the oven should be slow all the time.


Stewed Pears--II

  6 pears
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar
  1 wine-glass red wine
  2 cloves
  Rind of a lemon thinly pared

Pare and cut the pears in half. Take out the cores. Put in a saucepan.
Cover with water. Add the sugar, wine, cloves and lemon rind. Simmer as
slowly as possible. Arrange in a dish. Add a few drops of cochineal to
the juice. Strain it over the pears.


Stewed Pears (White)

(_Old French Receipt_)

Put several unpeeled pears into boiling water. Cook for several
minutes. Take out and throw into cold water. Peel when cold and divide
in two. Put back into fresh cold water.

To a gill of water add sufficient sugar to make a sweet syrup. Boil
and skim. When clear, add the pears and a slice of lemon. Simmer until
tender. Remove the lemon and serve cold.


Stewed Prunes

  1 lb. prunes
  1 pint water
  ¹⁄₂ lb. sugar
  1 lemon

Peel the lemon very finely. Put the peel, water, sugar and prunes in a
stew-pan. Simmer gently until very tender. Put the prunes in a glass
dish. Add the juice of the lemon to the syrup. Reduce it until thick.
Strain over the prunes. This is best prepared the day before it is
required.


Strawberries and Cream

Pick over a number of fine strawberries. Put a layer of them in a glass
dish. Sprinkle sugar over them. Add one or two more layers and sprinkle
each with sugar. Set aside for about an hour.

Whip half a pint of cream with the white of two eggs and two ozs.
powdered sugar until very frothy. Let it stand a few minutes. Remove
all the froth to a sieve to drain, and whip up the liquid cream
remaining. When that is frothy, drain it on a sieve as before. Keep
the cream in a cold place till it is required, piling it on the
strawberries when ready to serve.


Fruit Salad

Take tinned or fresh pine-apple, peaches, apricots and fresh
strawberries, cherries, bananas, oranges, according to season. Cut the
large fruit into small pieces. Put all into a large bowl. Make a syrup
(see p. 151) of sugar and water, or, if tinned pears and pine apples
have been used, of their juice and sugar. Pour it over the fruit while
warm. Let it stand a little while. Place on the dish in which it is to
be served. Decorate with grapes or crystallised sugar.


Orange Salad

Peel a number of oranges, scraping off all the white inner skin with a
sharp knife. Cut across in slices, removing all the core and seeds. Put
a layer of orange in a dish. Sprinkle thickly with sugar and a little
rum. Add two or three more layers of orange and sugar. Serve at once,
as the orange quickly becomes bitter.


Orange and Cocoanut Salad

Peel six oranges. Scrape off the inner white skin carefully. Slice
them, removing the core and seeds. Grate half a cocoanut. Put alternate
layers of orange and cocoanut in a dish. The top layer should be
cocoanut. Sprinkle each layer with sugar. Serve as soon as possible
after making.


Pine Apple Salad

1 pine apple ¹⁄₂ pint syrup 1 table-spoon curaçoa

Peel the pine apple and grate it. Mix the curaçoa with the syrup (see
p. 151). Pour over the fruit.




Pancakes


                    PAGE

  Pancakes--I.        37

     ”      II.       37

     ” with Jam       38

     ” French         38

  Rice Pancakes       39




General Directions


To fry pancakes, melt a piece of fresh butter in a small frying-pan.
When it is very hot pour in sufficient batter to cover the frying-pan
with a thin layer. Fry over a clear fire, shaking the pan constantly.
Loosen the edges of the pancake, when set, with a knife. Give a good
shake and toss, bringing the pancake down on the other side. As each is
done, put it on a very hot plate in the oven and continue frying the
others as quickly as possible.


Pancakes--I (French Receipt)

  4 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ lb. sifted flour
  1 pint milk
  1 table-spoon olive oil
  1 table-spoon brandy, rum, absinthe or kirsch
  Salt

Beat the eggs. Add the milk, flour, etc., mixing well together until
perfectly smooth. Set aside for three hours. When ready to fry, add to
the batter one white of egg beaten to a stiff froth. Fry in butter.


Pancakes--II (American)

  5 table-spoons flour
  7 eggs
  1 pint cream or milk

Sift the flour with a tea-spoon of salt. Mix it smoothly with the
cream. Beat up the yolks and add them, mixing thoroughly. Beat four
whites to a stiff froth and stir them lightly in. Fry in very hot
butter. Serve with sugar and cinnamon or lemon.


Pancakes with Jam

  ¹⁄₂ lb. flour
  1 table-spoon sugar
  ¹⁄₄ lb. melted butter
  5 eggs
  1¹⁄₄ pints milk

First mix the sugar, flour and unbeaten eggs. Add the butter, milk and
a little salt. Fry in butter in a small frying-pan, two table-spoons at
a time. As soon as a pancake is done on one side, lay it on a dish and
spread it with apricot or strawberry jam. Cover it with another, and so
on. Sprinkle the top pancake with sugar and glaze with a salamander.
Serve very hot.


*French Pancakes

  2 eggs
  2 ozs. powdered sugar
  2 ozs. flour
  2 ozs. butter
  ¹⁄₂ pint milk

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the well-beaten eggs, and beat
together. Stir in the sugar, flour, and lastly the milk, beating all
the time.

Bake in six well-buttered saucers in a quick oven about twenty minutes.
Fold each pancake over. Sprinkle with powdered sugar, and serve with
lemon.


Rice Pancakes

  ¹⁄₄ lb. rice
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream or milk
  1 table-spoon powdered sugar
  4 eggs
  2 ozs. butter
  Flour

Boil the rice in water until very tender. Pound it and put it through
a sieve. When cold add the cream or milk, sugar, well-beaten eggs and
butter, which should be warmed and creamed. Add flour, if necessary, to
make a fairly stiff batter. Fry in butter.




Fritters


                      PAGE

  Fruit Fritters        43

  Henriettes            44

  Orange Fritters       44

  Pine Apple Fritters   45

  Portuguese Fritters   45

  Soufflé Fritters      46

  Strawberry Fritters   47




General Directions


Fritters are crisper if fried in clarified fat than in lard.

In making fruit fritters dip each piece of fruit into batter. See that
it is well covered.

Drop fritters, a few at a time, into smoking hot fat, being careful
that they do not touch each other; fry a rich yellow. Take out with a
skimmer and set in the oven for a few minutes on soft paper to drain.
Sift sugar over the fritters and serve with a wine or fruit sauce.


Batter for Fritters--I

(_French Receipt_)

  2 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ lb. flour
  1 table-spoon olive oil
  1 table-spoon brandy
  ¹⁄₂ cup water, milk or beer

Mix the flour and water, milk or beer, perfectly smooth. Add the
well-beaten yolks, the oil and brandy (which is optional) and a little
salt. Mix well and set aside for two or three hours. When the batter is
wanted, beat the whites until stiff and dry and add them.


Batter for Fritters--II

  9 ozs. flour
  1 table-spoon powdered sugar
  4 eggs
  8 table-spoons butter (melted)
  ¹⁄₂ cup white wine
  2 table-spoons brandy

Mix the flour, sugar and well-beaten yolks together. Beat until smooth,
adding a little salt. Stir in the melted butter, white wine and brandy,
and, just before using, the whites beaten until they are stiff and dry.


Fruit Fritters

Fritters may be made of apples, bananas, oranges, apricots, pine-apple,
peaches, etc. The fruit should be ripe and perfect.

Cut apples across in slices about a third of an inch thick. Take out
the core from the centre of each piece.

Cut each slice of pine-apple into four pieces.

Slice bananas lengthwise, cutting each slice in half if too long.

Cut peaches and apricots in quarters.

All fruit for fritters is best soaked for a couple of hours in
well-sweetened brandy, rum or kirsch, to which a little ground cinnamon
and the finely grated peel and the juice of a lemon have been added.
The fruit must be well drained before it is dipped in batter.

When this is not done each piece of fruit should be sprinkled with
sugar, a very little lemon juice and spice.

For frying see general directions.


Henriettes

  1 egg
  ¹⁄₂ gill cream
  Salt
  1 salt-spoon baking-powder
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla
  1 tea-spoon brandy
  Flour

Beat the yolk and white separately. Mix all smoothly together with
sufficient flour to roll out. Roll as thin as possible, and cut into
squares and ribbons. Fry in boiling lard. Drain and sprinkle with
flavoured sugar (see p. 164).


Orange Fritters

Peel and divide several sweet oranges into sections. Scrape off all
pith with a sharp knife. Take out the seeds. Drop them into a syrup
made of water, sugar and a table-spoon of brandy, and let them simmer
for a few minutes. Take out and drain on a sieve. Dip in batter and fry
(see p. 41). Put in the oven to drain and sprinkle with orange sugar
(see p. 164).


Pine-Apple Fritters

  1 pine-apple (fresh or tinned)
  2 cups flour
  1 table-spoon melted butter
  1 egg
  Water

Pare and grate the pine-apple. To the juice add the flour. Mix
perfectly smooth. Add the well-beaten yolk, a little salt and the
butter. If fresh pine-apple is used add sufficient water to make the
batter thin enough to drop from the end of spoon. Beat the white of egg
to a stiff froth and stir it in quickly and lightly when ready to fry.
Drop into the boiling fat by the table-spoon and fry a golden brown.
Drain on paper in the oven and dust with lemon sugar (see p. 164).


Portuguese Fritters

(Pain Perdu)

  1 pint milk
  1 yolk
  2 table-spoons sugar
  Bread
  2 ozs. butter
  1 dessert-spoon orange-flower water

Boil the milk with the sugar, grated rind of a lemon, and orange-flower
water until it is reduced one half.

Cut several slices of bread half an inch thick. Take off the crust and
cut the bread into rounds about the size of the top of a tumbler. Dip
these in the milk and then in the well-beaten yolk. Fry in butter.
Sprinkle with lemon sugar (see p. 164) or put on each one a spoonful of
jam. Serve very hot.


Soufflé Fritters

(Beignets Soufflés)

  1 cup water
  2 ozs. butter
  4 ozs. flour
  1 tea-spoon powdered sugar
  6 yolks
  3 whites

Set the water on the fire. Add the sugar, butter and a little salt.
As soon as it boils add the flour all at once. Work it smooth with
a wooden spoon, and stir it over the fire for two or three minutes.
Take off the fire and add the yolks of six eggs, one after the other,
beating hard all the time. Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff
froth. Add this to the batter stirring it lightly in. Divide into
pieces about the size of an egg, sprinkle them with flour and fry them
in a very large saucepan of clarified fat, giving each fritter room to
swell without touching another. The fat should not be too hot at first,
but as the fritters swell the heat should be increased. When a good
colour take them out, drain them and sprinkle them with sugar. Serve at
once very hot.


Strawberry Fritters

Dip whole strawberries into batter No. II. Fry a good colour. Drain.
Sprinkle with sugar and glaze with a salamander.




Omelets

                      PAGE

  Sweet Omelet--I.      50

    ”    ”      II.     50

  Foam   ”              51

  Orange ”              51

  Rum    ”              52




General Directions


A special pan should be kept for omelets. It must be used for nothing
else. After being used it is best to scour it with a little salt and
vinegar in order to keep a perfectly smooth surface.

Melt a tea-spoon of butter in the pan, let it run well over it, but do
not let it burn. Pour in the eggs. Lift the egg mixture at the sides as
it cooks so as to let the uncooked part flow under. This must, however,
only be done at first or the surface will be roughened. When the egg is
firm underneath but still soft on top, fold one side carefully over the
other with a knife. Slip gently on a very hot plate. Serve quickly and
very hot. Add a little salt to the eggs whilst beating.


Sweet Omelet--I

  3 eggs
  Powdered sugar
  Jam

Beat the eggs slightly with one table-spoon of powdered sugar. Cook as
directed. Before folding over spread with apricot or strawberry jam.
Fold. Sprinkle with powdered sugar, and score several diagonal lines on
the top with a clean red-hot poker or iron.


Sweet Omelet--II

  3 eggs
  2 tablespoons rich cream
  Powdered sugar
  Jam

Beat the yolks with one table-spoon sugar and the cream until very
light and frothy. Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Fold them lightly
into the yolks. Pour into a pan, and when firm set in the oven a few
moments to dry. Fold in half, sprinkle with sugar and score several
diagonal lines with a clean red-hot poker.


Foam Omelet

  3 eggs
  1 table-spoon powdered sugar

Beat the yolks and sugar together. Beat the whites to a stiff froth.
Add half of them to the yolks, folding lightly in. Pour into a pan, and
when the mixture is nearly set spread it with the rest of the whites,
flavoured with a little vanilla or lemon juice and sweetened. When the
whites are thoroughly heated, fold over. Sprinkle with sugar and serve
quickly.


Orange Omelet

  3 eggs
  Powdered sugar
  Orange sugar
  The finely grated rind of one orange
  3 table-spoons orange juice

Beat the yolks and two table-spoons powdered sugar until creamy and
light. Add the juice and rind. Beat again. Fold in the whites beaten to
a stiff froth. Proceed as for sweet omelet No. II. Sprinkle the omelet
thickly with orange sugar (see p. 164).


Rum Omelet

  3 eggs
  Powdered sugar
  Rum

Beat the eggs with one table-spoon sugar. Pour into the pan. Sprinkle
well with sugar before folding. Fold. Slip on a very hot dish. Pour
lighted rum over the omelet, basting the omelet with the rum until it
is extinguished. Serve quickly.




Baked Soufflés


                          PAGE

  Chocolate Soufflé         55

  Coffee Soufflé            55

  Maraschino Soufflé        56

  Omelette Soufflée         56

  Punch Soufflé             57

  Soufflé Royal             57

  Strawberry Soufflé        58

  Vanilla Soufflé           58




General Directions


Soufflés should be made in dishes made for the purpose and must be
served in the same. The dish should be spread with cold butter, the
soufflé mixed not a moment before it is time to put it in the oven
(which should be moderately hot), and served immediately it is taken
out. A soufflé is better underdone than overdone.

Great care must be taken to whisk in the whites of eggs as quickly and
lightly as possible.

It is best to tie a piece of buttered paper round the outside of the
mould, so that the soufflé does not run over. In any case room must be
given for it to rise.

If there is danger of the soufflé burning, cover it with a sheet of
greased paper.


Chocolate Soufflé

To the vanilla soufflé (see page 58) add 2 ozs. fine powdered
chocolate, stirring it into the mixture whilst boiling.


Coffee Soufflé

  2 ozs. roasted whole coffee
  1¹⁄₂ pints cream or milk
  3 ozs. butter
  3 ozs. fine flour
  3 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  8 eggs

Throw the coffee into the boiling cream or milk. Cover closely and set
aside for an hour. Strain through fine muslin. Melt the butter in a
large enamel saucepan. Add the flour. Mix till perfectly smooth. Add
the cream and sugar. Stir together. Set aside to cool. Add the yolks
beaten till creamy, and the vanilla. Then whip in the whites, which
should be whisked to a firm froth. Bake in a buttered soufflé dish in a
moderate oven for three-quarters of an hour.


Maraschino Soufflé

  3 yolks
  4 whites
  1 table-spoon maraschino
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar
  3 table-spoons flour
  1 pint cream

Beat the yolks and sugar for ten minutes. Add the flour. Beat till
perfectly smooth. Add the maraschino and cream. Beat the whites to a
stiff froth. Beat them lightly in. Pour into a soufflé dish and bake.
Sprinkle with powdered sugar.


Omelette Soufflée

  6 eggs
  4 heaped table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Beat the yolks and sugar together for fifteen minutes. Add the
flavouring. Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Pour the yolks on the
whites and whisk them lightly and quickly till mixed. Pour into a
buttered tin, sprinkle with powdered sugar, and put in a moderately hot
oven. It should take about ten to fifteen minutes to bake. Serve at
once.


Punch Soufflé

  1 pint cream (or milk)
  2 table-spoons China or green tea
  3 ozs. butter
  3 ozs. flour
  1 glass rum
  1 lemon
  8 yolks

Boil the cream. Add to it the tea. Set it back on the oven and let it
stand five minutes closely covered. Strain off the cream. Melt the
butter in a saucepan. Add the flour and stir till perfectly smooth.
Add the cream. Stir continually for four or five minutes. Pour into a
basin. Add the sugar, juice of the lemon, half of the grated rind and
the rum. Beat well together until cooler. Gradually add the well-beaten
yolks, beating vigorously while doing so. Bake for about three-quarters
of an hour.


Soufflé Royal

  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  2 table-spoons flour
  2 table-spoons powdered sugar
  2 table-spoons orange flower water
  ¹⁄₂ cup pounded almonds
  6 eggs

Mix the well-beaten yolks of six eggs with the rest of the ingredients,
beating all together hard for ten minutes. Add the whites beaten to a
firm froth. Mix well and pour into a buttered soufflé dish. Serve as
soon as the soufflé has risen. Pounded macaroons may be used instead of
almonds.


Strawberry Soufflé

  1 quart strawberries
  8 table-spoons powdered sugar
  8 whites of eggs
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon lemon juice

Press the berries through a fine sieve into a basin. Add the sugar.
Beat until very frothy. Add the lemon juice and the whites whipped to a
firm froth. Bake in a slow oven for half an hour. Sprinkle with lemon
sugar (see p. 164).


Vanilla Soufflé

  2 ozs. potato flour (or fine flour)
  2 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-cup milk or cream
  4 eggs
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  2 table-spoons butter

Mix the flour, sugar and milk to a perfectly smooth paste and stir
over the fire until the flour is cooked (the mixture should boil for
at least five minutes). Add the butter whilst boiling. Strain and set
aside to cool. Beat the yolks till creamy. Beat them together with the
milk, etc. Add the flavouring. Beat in the whites, whipped to a stiff
froth, very lightly. Bake in buttered soufflé dish in a moderate oven
for twenty-five minutes.

This soufflé may be flavoured with the syrup of preserved ginger, one
table-spoon of maraschino, the juice and grated rind of a lemon, or
with orange flower water.




Soufflé Puddings


                              PAGE

  Almond Soufflé                62

  Chocolate Soufflé             62

      ”       ” with Almonds    63

  Cream Soufflé                 64

  Lemon Soufflé                 64




General Directions


Do not more than half fill the tin. Tie a piece of buttered paper right
round the outside of the tin, letting it project about two inches above
the tin. Set the soufflé dish in a vessel of simmering water, which
should reach half way up the soufflé tin and which should boil gently
and be replenished from time to time with boiling water. Cook either in
a very moderate oven, or on a very gentle fire. The water should only
simmer.

When cooked, turn the soufflés out carefully and serve with cream or
wine sauce.


Almond Soufflé

  4 ozs. almonds
  7 eggs
  4 ozs. sugar
  1 table-spoon lemon sugar
  2¹⁄₂ ozs. flour

Blanch and pound the almonds with one whole egg. Add the sugar, six
yolks, lemon sugar (see p. 164). Beat for quarter of an hour. Sift in
the flour lightly, avoiding lumps, and add the whites beaten to a stiff
froth. Pour into a buttered mould and steam about an hour.


Chocolate Soufflé

  2 ozs. butter
  2 ozs. fine flour
  ¹⁄₂ pint milk
  1 oz. sugar
  2 ozs. powdered chocolate
  4 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Melt the butter in a saucepan. Add the flour. Mix until quite smooth.
Add the boiling milk gradually and stir together into a smooth paste.
Strain through a sieve into a basin. Add the vanilla, sugar and
chocolate. Add the well-beaten yolks when the mixture is nearly cold,
and then the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Mix thoroughly and pour
into a buttered mould. Steam for about an hour and a half.


Chocolate Soufflé with Almonds

  4 ozs. butter
  4 ozs. sugar
  4 ozs. chocolate
  4 ozs. almonds
  6 eggs
  1 white
  2 table-spoons finely chopped candied orange and citron

Blanch and pound the almonds in a mortar with the white of an egg. Beat
the butter to a cream. Beat the yolks thoroughly and add them to the
butter, beating till smooth and foamy. Add the sugar, almonds and the
melted chocolate. Beat all together ten minutes. Add the chopped peel,
and the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Pour into a buttered mould and
steam for one and a half hours.


Cream Soufflé

  2 table-spoons fine flour
  4 ozs. butter
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  5 eggs
  1¹⁄₂ ozs. sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla or 1 table-spoon maraschino

Stir the flour with 2 ozs. of butter over the fire till smooth. Add the
cream, and stir continually till it boils. Set aside to cool.

Beat the yolks till creamy. Beat the butter to a cream. Beat the butter
and yolks together with the sugar and vanilla. Mix with the cream. Beat
together and beat in three whites whipped to a stiff froth. Pour into a
buttered mould. Steam over the fire for three quarters of an hour.


Lemon Soufflé

  1 oz. butter
  ¹⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  1 lemon
  1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour
  5 eggs

Beat the yolks till creamy. Mix them with the flour, sugar, warmed
butter and grated rind of one lemon, and beat well together. Stir over
the fire till the mixture thickens. Set aside in a basin till cool.
Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Whip them lightly in. Steam in a
buttered mould for half an hour.




Hot Puddings


                                PAGE

  Albemarle Pudding               66

  Apple and Apricot Charlotte     66

  Apple Custard                   67

  Bread and Rum Pudding           68

  Cherry Pudding                  68

  Christmas Plum Pudding--I.      69

      ”       ”           II.     70

  Dutch Apple Cake                70

  Fig Pudding                     71

  Friar’s Omelet                  71

  Gooseberry Pudding              72

  Ginger Pudding                  72

  Italian Mousse                  73

  Little Citron Puddings          73

  Marmalade Pudding               74

  Mousse à la Mangara             74

  Palace Pudding                  75

  Pine Apple and Rice Mould       75

  Plum Pudding                    76

  Strawberry Shortcake            77


Albemarle Pudding

  4 ozs. butter
  4 ozs. powdered sugar
  3 eggs
  1 lemon
  ³⁄₄ lb. flour
  Raisins

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar and rind of a lemon. Beat
well. Add the well-beaten yolks and flour alternately, beating
continually. When quite smooth, add the juice of the lemon, and the
whites beaten to a stiff froth. Butter a mould, and line the top of it
with raisins. Pour in the mixture, and steam an hour and a half. Serve
with a wine sauce.


*Apple and Apricot Charlotte

  6 large apples
  Butter, the size of a walnut
  Sugar
  The finely peeled rind of a lemon
  ¹⁄₂ lb. apricot jam

Peel and core the apples. Cut in quarters. Stew with the butter, and
sufficient sugar to sweeten, until tender, taking care not to let them
burn.

Warm the jam in a saucepan, and put through a sieve. Add to the apples,
and stir well together.

Line a buttered mould with strips of thin bread which have been dipped
in melted butter. Fill in with the apple and apricot mixture. Cover
with a round of bread also dipped in butter. Bake about twenty minutes,
or until the bread is well coloured.


Apple Custard

  6 large apples
  3 eggs
  6 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 pint milk

Pare and core the apples. Fill the centre of each with sugar and bake,
being careful that they do not break. Or they can be stewed whole.

Make a custard (see p. 15) of the yolks, milk and half the sugar.

Pour it over the apples, which should be arranged in a dish. Bake
slowly until the custard is firm. Whip the whites till frothy. Add the
rest of the sugar gradually, and beat well together. Spread this over
the custard, and put in a moderate oven. Remove directly the meringue
is browned.


*Bread and Rum Pudding

  2 wine glasses rum
  4 eggs
  6 ozs. powdered sugar
  6 ozs. bread crumbs
  6 ozs. currants
  ¹⁄₂ lb. candied peel
  4 ozs. butter
  3 table-spoons milk

Melt the butter, mix it with the sugar, bread crumbs and yolks. Stir
well together. Add the currants, milk, chopped peel and one glass of
rum. Beat the whites to a stiff froth, and stir them in. Put in a
buttered mould. Steam three hours. When cooked, pour another glass of
rum over the pudding, and serve.


*Cherry Pudding

  4 eggs
  1 pint milk
  2 table-spoons of flour
  Cherries
  Sugar

Stone enough cherries to fill a basin, which must be well buttered.
Add sufficient sugar to sweeten well. Make a smooth batter of the
well-beaten eggs, flour and milk. Pour it over the cherries, filling
the basin. Cover with a cloth, and boil one and a half hours. Serve
with a fruit sauce.


Christmas Plum Pudding--I

  1¹⁄₂ lb. suet
  1 lb. flour
  ¹⁄₂ lb. bread crumbs
  2 lbs. raisins
  1 lb. sultanas
  ¹⁄₂ lb. currants
  ¹⁄₂ lb. mixed candied peel
  ¹⁄₂ lb. sugar
  1 salt-spoon salt
  Grated rind and juice of three lemons
  ¹⁄₂ nutmeg, grated
  4 blanched and pounded bitter almonds
  1 tea-spoon mixed spice
  1    ”      ground cinnamon
  ¹⁄₂  ”        ”    ginger
  1 pint brandy or sherry
  5 eggs beaten up with ¹⁄₂ pint milk
  Orange juice, if liked

Chop the suet very fine. Mix the sugar and spices. Add the suet,
well-prepared fruit, eggs and brandy. Let the mixture stand until
the following day, stirring well at intervals. Put the mixture into
well-buttered basins, filling them to within two inches of the top.
Cover with buttered paper, and over this tie a well-floured cloth.

Boil for eight hours.


Christmas Plum Pudding--II

For each Pudding

  ¹⁄₄ lb. raisins
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sultanas
  ¹⁄₄ lb. currants
  ¹⁄₄ lb. orange peel
  ¹⁄₄ lb. lemon peel
  ¹⁄₄ lb. almonds (chopped)
  ¹⁄₄ lb. chopped preserved ginger
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar
  5 ozs. chopped suet
  3 heaped table-spoons flour
  5 eggs
  Spices, brandy or whisky to taste
  Salt

Boil twelve hours.


*Dutch Apple Cake

  1 pint flour
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon carbonate of soda
  1 tea-spoon cream of tartar
  ¹⁄₄ cup butter
  1 egg
  1 scant cup milk
  4 sour apples
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar

Mix and sift the dry materials together. Rub in the butter. Beat the
egg. Mix it with the milk. Add to the flour and stir well in. Spread
the dough half an inch thick in a shallow tin. Pare the apples and
core them. Cut them into eighths. Put these in rows, pressing the thin
edge down into the dough. Sprinkle the sugar over the apples. Bake in a
hot oven twenty to thirty minutes. Serve with lemon sauce (see p. 85).


Fig Pudding

  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  ¹⁄₄ lb. figs
  ¹⁄₄ lb. bread crumbs
  2 eggs

Chop the figs and stew them in the butter for quarter of an hour. Beat
the eggs well. Mix them with the bread crumbs. Add the figs and butter.
Steam on a buttered mould three hours.


Friar’s Omelet

  Apples
  3 eggs
  1 cup sugar
  Juice of half a lemon
  Bread crumbs

Steam several sour apples. Mash them and then drain them until quite
dry. Take one pint of this pulp, and when cool add to it the three
well-beaten yolks, the sugar, lemon juice, and the whites beaten to
a stiff froth. Brown some very fine bread crumbs in a little butter.
Sprinkle the bottom and sides of a well-buttered pudding dish with
them. Pour in the mixture. Cover with bread crumbs. Bake twenty
minutes. Serve with brown sugar and cream.


*Gooseberry Pudding

  3 cups gooseberries
  ³⁄₄ lb. butter
  ³⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  8 eggs
  4 sponge-fingers

Stew the gooseberries in water until tender. Do not let them break.
Take them out and drain. Then put them through a fine sieve.

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar and beat again. Stir in the
gooseberry pulp, the well-beaten eggs and the sponge-fingers finely
crushed. Mix well and bake in a pudding dish for thirty minutes.


Ginger Pudding

  ¹⁄₂ lb. flour
  6 ozs. suet
  1 table-spoon brown sugar
  2 table-spoons golden syrup
  1 tea-spoon baking powder
  2 eggs
  A little milk

Sift the baking powder with the flour. Beat the eggs until creamy. Mix
all well together. Steam two and a half hours.


*Italian Mousse

  12 yolks
  4 wine glasses Madeira or light white wine
  6 ozs. powdered sugar
  A pinch of powdered cinnamon
  A little lemon juice

Beat well together. Pour into an enamelled sauce-pan and stand it in a
larger vessel containing hot water. Beat continually with a whisk until
the mixture froths and rises. Serve immediately in glasses.


*Little Citron Puddings

  ¹⁄₂ pint of cream
  1 table-spoon sifted flour
  2 ozs. powdered sugar
  Nutmeg
  3 yolks

Mix the cream, flour, sugar and a very little nutmeg together until
quite smooth. Add the well-beaten yolks. Butter five small tea-cups or
moulds and line with very thin pieces of citron. Pour in the mixture,
but do not fill quite full. Bake in a fairly quick oven.

Turn out the puddings and serve at once.


Marmalade Pudding

  2 eggs
  Their weight in flour, butter and powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon marmalade
  1 tea-spoon baking-powder

Sift the flour and baking-powder together. Beat the butter to a cream.
Add the sugar and beat again. Add the flour, marmalade and well-beaten
yolks. Beat the whites to a stiff froth and add them last. Pour into a
buttered basin and steam for an hour and a half. Turn out and spread
with a little marmalade. Serve with a sweet sauce.


Mousse à la Mangara

  ¹⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  6 eggs
  Wine glass of kirsch

Beat the sugar and eggs together until creamy and light. Add the kirsch
and stand in a sauce-pan of hot water. Set over a slow fire and stir
continually until the mixture thickens. It must not boil. Take off the
fire and add the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Serve at once.


Palace Pudding

  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  ¹⁄₄ lb. castor sugar
  3 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla
  ¹⁄₄ lb. flour

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar and well-beaten eggs. Beat
thoroughly. Add the flour. When well mixed add the vanilla. Butter a
mould. Sprinkle it with powdered sugar. Steam one hour. Before turning
out, let the pudding stand for a minute or two.


*Pine-Apple and Rice Mould

  ¹⁄₂ lb. rice
  1 pint milk
  3 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ lb. pine-apple
  Syrup
  ¹⁄₄ lb. tinned apricots
  2 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon kirsch

Cook the rice in the milk in a double boiler until it is very tender
and the milk is all absorbed. Cut the pine-apple in small pieces and
let it simmer for several minutes in a little syrup (see p. 151).

Beat three whole eggs well together. Add them to the rice and then the
pine-apple. When well mixed pour into a buttered mould. Bake for about
half-an-hour.

Mash the apricots. Add the sugar. When melted pass through a sieve. Add
the kirsch, pour over the pudding.


Plum Pudding

  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  1 gill cream
  1 gill rum
  ¹⁄₂ lb. chopped suet
  1 cup chopped raisins
  1 cup currants
  ¹⁄₄ lb. chopped citron
  6 eggs
  1 tea-spoon ground spices
  Bread-crumbs

Beat the butter and sugar to a cream. Add the rum and cream. Beat well.
Add the suet and well-floured fruit. Beat the eggs together till very
light. Add then the spices and sufficient fine bread-crumbs to make a
stiff batter. Pour into a buttered mould. Boil five hours.


*Strawberry Shortcake

  ¹⁄₂ lb. flour
  3 ozs. butter
  1 table-spoon sugar
  2 tea-spoons baking-powder
  Milk
  Strawberries, sugar and butter

Sift the flour, sugar and baking-powder together twice. Rub in the
butter. Add sufficient milk to make a dough (about three-quarters
of a cup), mixing lightly with a knife. Put on a floured board and
roll out lightly. Divide in two. Bake in two well-buttered round tins
(about eight inches in diameter) in a hot oven for twelve minutes. When
baked, split open and spread with plenty of butter and a thick layer of
crushed and well-sweetened strawberries. Serve at once very hot.

The strawberries should be prepared about half an hour before they are
needed.




Sauces


                                      PAGE

  Banana Sauce                          80

  Chocolate Sauce                       80

  Custard Sauce                         81

  Foam Sauce                            81

  Fruit Sauce                           82

  Golden Sauce                          82

  Golden Syrup or Molasses Sauce        83

  Hard Sauce                            83

  Hard Sauce with Fruit                 84

  Jelly Sauce                           84

  Lemon Sauce                           85

  Melted Butter                         85

  Sabaillon                             86

  Whipped Cream Sauce                   86

  Wine Sauce--I.                        87

    ”    ”    II.                       87




General Directions


All hot pudding sauces should be served as soon as made.

Butter may be creamed in a warmed basin but should on no account be
melted.

Sauces made with yolks of eggs are best made in a _bain marie_; _i.e._
a saucepan placed in a larger pan containing hot water.


Banana Sauce

  1 cup water
  4 table-spoons powdered sugar
  4 bananas
  1 dessert-spoon maraschino or
  1 wine-glass of wine

Put the water and sugar in a sauce-pan and stir until the sugar is
dissolved. Add four bananas which have been mashed with a silver
fork. Boil for two minutes. Put through a sieve, and add the wine or
maraschino.


Chocolate Sauce

  ¹⁄₂ cup water
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar
  3 ozs. chocolate
  Vanilla
  ¹⁄₂ cup scalded cream

Boil the water and sugar together for five minutes. Stir in the melted
chocolate. Add a little vanilla. Stir in the cream immediately before
serving. If the chocolate mixture cannot be served at once, stand it in
a pan of hot water until it is needed.


Custard Sauce

  ¹⁄₂ pint milk (or cream)
  2 table-spoons powdered sugar
  Yolks of 2 eggs
  Vanilla

Boil the milk and sugar together. Beat the yolks thoroughly, and pour
the milk over them. Strain and return to the saucepan, stirring until
it thickens. Do not let it boil. Add a little vanilla.


Foam Sauce

  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  1 cup castor sugar
  ¹⁄₄ cup boiling water
  White of 1 egg
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  2 table-spoons wine, fruit juice or syrup

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar, vanilla and wine. Just
before it is served stir in the boiling water. Then add the well-beaten
white of an egg, and beat until the sauce is foamy.


Fruit Sauce

  1 cup juice of fresh or stewed fruit
  1 tea-spoon arrowroot
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar

Let the juice boil, add gradually the arrowroot (which must be smoothly
mixed with a very little water), and boil for five minutes. Strain.

If jam is used, half a cup will be sufficient. It should first be well
beaten and then passed through a sieve. Half a cup of water should be
added to it, and less sugar will be required.


Golden Sauce

  4 ozs. butter
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar
  Yolks of 2 eggs
  1 table-spoon boiling water
  Juice of ¹⁄₂ a lemon
  Wine-glass of wine or brandy

Beat sugar and butter together until creamy. Put the bowl in hot water
and stir until liquid. Add the well-beaten yolks and hot water, and
stir until the mixture thickens. Add lemon juice and wine. Beat well
together.


Golden Syrup or Molasses Sauce

  1 cup syrup or molasses
  Juice of a lemon
  1 table-spoon vinegar
  1 table-spoon salt butter

Boil altogether for ten minutes. This is a good sauce to serve with
plain boiled rice or batter pudding.


Hard Sauce

  2 ozs. butter
  2 ozs. castor sugar
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla
  1 table-spoon brandy

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar gradually. Beat well. Then
add the brandy, a very little at a time. Pile the sauce lightly on a
dish and keep it on ice until required. This sauce is excellent with
plum puddings.


Hard Sauce with Fruit

  2 ozs. butter
  2 ozs. powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ lb. crushed strawberries
  Whites of 2 eggs

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar gradually, beating hard all
the time. Add the strawberries, which have first been crushed. Beat
again thoroughly. Add one unbeaten white of egg. Beat well and then add
the other white. Beat again thoroughly and stand on ice.


Jelly Sauce

  ¹⁄₂ cup of red currant or blackberry jelly
  The juice of 1 lemon
  Grated rind of ¹⁄₂ a lemon
  1 heaping table-spoon powdered sugar
  2 glasses white wine

Beat the jelly till it is quite a light colour. Add the lemon juice and
rind to the jelly. Bring almost to the boil. Stir continually. Take off
the fire and add the sugar and wine, beating hard. The dish containing
this sauce should be covered and must be kept in a basin full of very
hot water until served. Give it a good whisk before serving.


Lemon Sauce

  Grated rind and juice of a lemon
  1 cup powdered sugar
  3 tea-spoons cornflour
  1 pint hot water

Boil the water and sugar together for five minutes. Mix the cornflour
in a cup with a little water until it is perfectly smooth, and then add
it gradually to the syrup, stirring quickly all the time. Let it all
boil again for ten minutes. Add the grated rind and juice of the lemon.
Strain.


Melted Butter

  2 table-spoons butter
  2 tea-spoons flour
  1¹⁄₂ cups of hot water (or water and milk)
  1 cup brown or powdered sugar
  Flavouring

Melt the butter in a saucepan, being careful not to brown it. Add the
flour and mix until quite smooth. Then add the hot water (or milk and
water) gradually, stirring well all the time, and when it boils add the
sugar. Stir continually for five minutes. Remove from the fire and add
a small half tea-spoonful of vanilla or a little nutmeg if milk has
been used, but two tea-spoonfuls of fresh lemon juice, if it has been
made with water.


Sabaillon

  The yolks of 4 eggs
  1¹⁄₂ wine-glasses madeira or sherry
  4 table-spoons castor sugar
  A little cinnamon

This can be made in two ways.

I. Put eggs, wine and sugar into a saucepan on a good fire. Beat
continually until the mixture thickens. It must not boil.

OR,

II. Beat eggs and sugar very thoroughly together for five minutes.
Then add the wine. Put into an earthenware pot and stand this in a
large saucepan of very hot water. Beat over the fire until the mixture
thickens.


Whipped Cream Sauce

  ¹⁄₂ pint of cream
  ¹⁄₂ cup of castor sugar
  White of 1 egg
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla, or a little brandy

Beat the cream until stiff. Add the sugar and vanilla. Beat the white
of egg until frothy. Add to the cream and beat all together.


Wine Sauce--I

  ¹⁄₂ pint melted butter
  1 tea-spoon lemon juice
  1 wine-glass sherry or madeira

Make the melted butter (see p. 85) with water. Sweeten it with brown
sugar and flavour it with lemon juice and a very little grated peel.
Add the wine at the last and do not let it boil again.


Wine Sauce--II

  1 cup white wine
  Yolks of 4 eggs
  1 tea-spoon lemon juice
  The rind of ¹⁄₄ of a lemon

Heat the wine, sugar, lemon juice and peel. Beat the yolks thoroughly
in a large basin. Directly the wine comes to the boil, pour it over the
yolks. Beat with an egg-whisk until very frothy.




Jellies


                         PAGE

  Calf’s Foot Jelly        91

  Gelatine Jelly           91

  Claret Jelly             92

  Cranberry Jelly          92

  Gelée Fouettée           93

  Lemon Froth              93

  Maraschino Jelly         94

  Orange Baskets           94

  Orange Jelly             94

  Prune Jelly              95

  Rhubarb Jelly            95


General Instructions

It has been found difficult in the receipts which follow, owing to
the variation of the quantity of juice in lemons, etc., to give the
exact quantity of gelatine required. _A safe rule in making jellies
is to use 2 ozs. of gelatine to every one and three-quarter quarts of
liquid._ In summer 2 ozs. of gelatine will be needed to each quart and
a half. (This must include all liquid flavourings and be very carefully
measured.)

The best gelatine is now so pure, that it is practically unnecessary to
go to the trouble of making jelly from calf’s feet, a receipt for which
has, however, been given.

More elaborate jellies are made by the addition of fruit. To do this,
pour jelly into a mould to the depth of half an inch. When set, arrange
on it a layer of perfectly fresh ripe fruit--strawberries, cherries,
grapes, pine-apple, peaches, oranges, etc.--adding another layer of
jelly, and when that is set, more fruit, and so on, until the mould is
full. During the process the mould should be kept on ice, so that the
jelly will set quickly.

Before putting jelly into a mould, dip it in very cold water, and
invert for a moment. Pour in the jelly while still wet.

Use a silver or wooden spoon for stirring, and do not stir jelly while
it is cooling.

To colour jelly pink, add a few drops of cochineal.

To loosen the jelly when ready to serve, dip the mould quickly into hot
water. Dry the mould before turning out.


Calf’s Foot Jelly

  4 calf’s feet
  4 quarts water
  1 pint wine or water
  1 lb. crushed lump sugar
  4 whites of eggs
  2 lemons
  ¹⁄₂ stick cinnamon
  1 tea-spoon grated nutmeg

Clean the calf’s feet thoroughly. Boil them in the water until it is
reduced to half the original quantity. This will take about eight
hours. Skim occasionally. Pour into a large basin. Set aside for twelve
hours. Remove the fat very carefully. Put back into a large pan, being
careful to keep back the dregs. Add the sugar whisked up with the
whites, the juice of the lemons, the grated rind of one, and the spice.
Let it boil for ten minutes. Skim. Add the wine and boil up again for
two minutes. Strain through a jelly bag two or three times, and keep in
a cold place.


Gelatine Jelly

  A little over ¹⁄₂ oz. isinglass
  1 gill cold water
  ¹⁄₂ pint boiling water
  3 ozs. sugar
  1 lemon
  1 white and the shell of 1 egg
  1 gill brandy

Soak the isinglass in the cold water for an hour. Put it into the
boiling water. Add the sugar, the finely-pared rind of the lemon,
the white and crushed shell of an egg. Boil one minute. Pour in a
table-spoon cold water. Set aside ten minutes. Strain through a jelly
bag. Add one gill brandy or sherry when cool. Pour into a wetted mould.


Cranberry Jelly

Stew some cranberries in plenty of water until they are soft. Rub them
through a sieve. Put the pulp into an enamelled saucepan. When it boils
add sugar in the proportion of one pound to every pint of pulp. Stir
continually for a few minutes and pour into a mould.


*Claret Jelly

  1 bottle claret
  1 lemon
  1 gill red currant jelly
  ¹⁄₂ lb. loaf sugar
  A little over 1 oz. isinglass
  1 gill brandy

Soak the gelatine in a very little water. Add it to the claret with the
juice and rind of the lemon, jelly, the crushed loaf sugar and brandy.
Boil altogether for five minutes. Put once through a jelly bag. Dip a
mould with a hollow centre into cold water. Pour in the jelly. Serve
with whipped cream in the centre of the mould. Instead of claret and
red currant jelly, a white wine and quince jelly can be used.


*Gelée Fouettée

  ¹⁄₂ pint champagne
  ¹⁄₂ pint water
  2 lemons
  6 ozs. lump sugar
  A little over 1 oz. gelatine

Make a syrup of the water and sugar. Add the soaked gelatine, juice of
two lemons and the finely-pared peel of one lemon. Boil three minutes.
Strain through a jelly bag. When cold, but still liquid, add the
champagne and beat on ice until very frothy. Put into a mould or serve
in glasses.


*Lemon Froth

  1 oz. gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ pint boiling water
  ¹⁄₂ pint cold water
  3 lemons
  6 ozs. lump sugar
  Whites of 6 eggs

Dissolve the gelatine and sugar in the boiling water with the
finely-pared lemon peel. Add the cold water and the juice of the
lemons. Skim with a silver spoon. Strain into a large basin. When
beginning to set, add the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Beat well
together and pile up in a glass dish. Serve with sweetened whipped
cream.


Maraschino Jelly

Make a gelatine jelly, using maraschino instead of brandy, and adding
it when the jelly is cold but still liquid.


Orange Baskets

Cut several oranges across in half. Take out the pulp and scrape the
inside until clean. Put into cold water. Use the juice to make a jelly.
Break the jelly into small pieces. Pile it high in each half of an
orange. Make handles of strips of Angelica. Whipped cream may be added
as a garnish.


Orange Jelly

  14 ozs. loaf sugar
  ¹⁄₂ pint water
  1 oz. isinglass
  12 oranges
  1 lemon
  1 white of egg

Boil the sugar and water together. Skim. Add the gelatine, the grated
rind of one orange, the lemon and the whisked white of egg. Boil five
minutes. Add the juice of the oranges. Strain through a jelly bag.


*Prune Jelly

  1 lb. prunes
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar
  2 thin pieces lemon peel
  1 oz. gelatine
  1¹⁄₂ pints water
  1 oz. sweet almonds
  1 gill sherry

Set the prunes to soak in water for one hour. Drain them and put them
in an enamelled saucepan. Add the water, lemon peel and sugar, and
stew till tender. Then remove the stones. Put the prunes through a
fine sieve. Crack the stones, split the kernels, and add them with the
blanched and chopped almonds to the prunes. Set on the fire again. Add
the gelatine, which should have been previously soaked for an hour.
Boil for five minutes, stirring all the time. Add the sherry. Pour into
a wet mould. Serve with whipped cream.


Rhubarb Jelly

  1¹⁄₂ lbs. rhubarb
  1¹⁄₂ lbs. lump sugar
  Gelatine
  1 lemon

Stew the rhubarb, the finely pared peel and juice of the lemon and
sugar with a little water, over a very gentle fire, until pulpy. Pass
through a fine sieve. To every pint of rhubarb pulp, add three quarters
of an ounce of gelatine dissolved in a very little boiling water. Stir
over the fire till thoroughly mixed. Pour into a wet mould with a
hollow in the centre. When serving, fill the hollow with whipped cream.




Creams


                                     PAGE

  Bavarian Cream--I.                   98

     ”     Cream--II.                  98

  Chartreuse of Orange                100

     ” of Strawberries                101

  Chestnut Cream                      102

  Chocolate Bavarois                  103

  Crème aux Fruits                    103

    ” Hollandaise                     104

  Noyau Cream                         105

  Orange Cream                        105

  Rhenish Cream                       106

  Rice Cream                          107

  Strawberry Cream                    108

  Strawberry or Raspberry Cream       108


*Bavarian Cream--I

  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  1 pint cream
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Soak the gelatine. Whip the cream. Dissolve the gelatine in a little
boiling milk. Strain it into a basin. Add whichever flavouring is
chosen, stirring continually until cool but still liquid. Then add the
cream and mix thoroughly. Pour into moulds and set on ice, if possible.

This cream may be flavoured with two table-spoons maraschino, two
table-spoons caramel (melted and browned sugar), a small coffee-cup
of very clear, strong coffee or three table-spoons powdered chocolate
instead of vanilla.


Bavarian Cream--II

  5 yolks
  4 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 oz. gelatine
  1 quart cream
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream

Boil half pint of cream, pour it over the yolks. Add the sugar and
stir over a gentle fire until the mixture begins to thicken. Add
the gelatine, which has been dissolved in a very little water. Mix
thoroughly. Put through a fine hair sieve into a basin. Beat until
cold. Add the vanilla and the cream whipped. Pour into a mould and set
on ice, if possible.

This cream can be flavoured with three table-spoons of maraschino
which should be added with the cream. In this case the mould used may
be lined with maraschino jelly (see p. 94). To do this fill the mould
with jelly to the depth of an inch. When it is firm, set a smaller
mould inside the mould in use, fill the space all round it with jelly
and leave till set. Then pour a little warm water on the inner mould
to loosen it. Take it out carefully and fill the space with cream. The
inner mould should be about an inch and a half smaller in diameter than
the outer mould.

A small cup of strong, clear coffee can be used as flavouring, or one
table-spoon lemon juice and one gill rum.


Chartreuse of Orange

  Orange jelly
  Oranges
  For cream
  ³⁄₄ oz. gelatine
  ³⁄₄ pint cream
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar

For this and the following receipt two plain moulds are required. One
should be about 1¹⁄₂ inches larger in diameter than the other.

Into the larger mould pour orange jelly (see p. 94) to make a layer
¹⁄₂ an inch deep. When slightly set arrange a second layer of sections
of oranges which have had all the skin and pips removed. Cover these
with more orange jelly. Set aside until firm. Place the smaller mould
exactly in the centre of the larger one, resting it on the jelly. Fill
up the space between the two moulds with sections of orange, prepared
as before. Pour jelly over them so that the space is completely filled
up. Place upon ice, or in a very cold place, until the jelly is firmly
set.

Dissolve the gelatine (which should have been previously soaked for
three hours) in a little hot milk. Whip the cream (see p. 3) and pour
in the strained gelatine slowly, stirring all the time. Flavour with a
syrup made as follows: Take ¹⁄₄ lb. lump sugar. Rub the rind of one
orange off on several lumps; put all together with the juice of two
oranges into an enamel saucepan. Stir over a gentle fire till melted.
Pour this syrup, when cool, slowly over the cream, whipping all the
time.

When the jelly is set pour a little warm water into the inner mould to
loosen it. Take it out very carefully. Fill in the space with the cream.

Other fruits may be used and lemon jelly can be used instead of orange.
In all cases great care should be taken in arranging the fruit.

If the oranges or fruit used are sour, soak them for an hour in a syrup
of sugar and brandy or rum.


*Chartreuse of Strawberries

  2 lbs. strawberries
  1 pint clear lemon jelly
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  Sugar
  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine

Proceed as for orange chartreuse, using one pound of strawberries cut
lengthways in half to decorate the jelly.

For the cream mash the rest of the strawberries with sufficient sugar
to sweeten thoroughly. Put through a fine sieve. Whip the cream.
Dissolve the gelatine in a very little hot water. Strain it, and when
cool, but still quite liquid, add it slowly to the strawberry juice,
stirring all the time. Add the whipped cream gradually and a few drops
of cochineal.


*Chestnut Cream

  20 chestnuts
  1 oz. gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ pint milk
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar
  ¹⁄₂ a lemon
  1 wine-glass curaçoa
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream

Boil, skin and pound the chestnuts, put them through a sieve. Boil the
thinly-peeled rind of a lemon, the sugar and milk together. Take off
the fire and add the previously-soaked gelatine. Stir till melted.
Strain. When cool add the chestnut purée and beat till smooth. Add the
curaçoa and whipped cream. Mix well and pour into a mould. Serve with
sweetened whipped cream.


*Chocolate Bavarois

  1 pint cream
  1 oz. gelatine
  1 oz. chocolate
  1 cup milk
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar

Soak the gelatine in a little of the milk. Melt the chocolate in a
little hot water with a little sugar. Stir until smooth. Boil the rest
of the milk. Add the gelatine to it. Stir till dissolved. Add the
chocolate. Strain and add the sugar. Set in a cool place, on ice if
possible, in a large basin. Beat until cool. Whip the cream (see p. 3).
Stir it in and pour all into a mould.


Crème aux Fruits

  1 quart cream
  ³⁄₄ cup sugar
  4 whites of eggs
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  1 table-spoon wine or liqueur
  1 cup chopped crystallised fruit
  1 oz. gelatine

Soak the gelatine in cold water. Whip the cream (see p. 3). Add the
sugar. Dissolve the gelatine in a very little boiling water. Stir
it quickly until cool. Pour it slowly on the whites beaten to a dry
stiff froth. Stir well together. Add the cream, mix very well. Add the
vanilla, wine or liqueur. When the mixture begins to thicken add the
fruit gradually. Place a number of crystallised cherries in the bottom
of a mould. Pour in the cream. Set on ice.


Crème Hollandaise

  10 yolks
  ¹⁄₂ pint white wine
  1 lemon
  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  1 pint whipped cream

Put the yolks, wine and the rind of the lemon, very thinly peeled,
into an enamelled saucepan. Stir over a gentle fire until the mixture
thickens. Melt the gelatine, which should have been soaked for an hour,
in as little hot water as possible. Add it slowly to the yolks. Stir
till thoroughly mixed. Strain into a basin. Beat until cool. Stir in
the whipped cream (see p. 3) and set on ice or in a cold place.


Noyau Cream

  ¹⁄₄ lb. Jordan almonds
  ¹⁄₂ oz. bitter almonds
  ¹⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  1¹⁄₄ pints cream
  1 oz. gelatine
  Noyau

Blanch and pound the almonds, moistening with a little of the cream.
Rub through a hair sieve. Whip the rest of the cream. Flavour with
noyau. Stir in the almonds and mix till smooth. Dissolve the gelatine,
which should have been soaked in preparation, in a very little hot
water. Strain and stir until cool but still liquid. Pour into the
cream, stirring continually until thoroughly mixed. Pour into a mould.


*Orange Cream

  1 large Seville orange
  1 table-spoon brandy
  4 yolks
  4 ozs. lump sugar
  1 pint cream
  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine

Rub the rind of the orange on to two or three lumps of sugar. Add them
to the rest of the sugar, brandy and the juice of the orange. Stir
over a very gentle fire till melted. When cool add the well beaten
yolks to the syrup. Beat for quarter of an hour. Scald the cream, add
the gelatine, dissolved in a very little water, to it. Mix well. Strain
on to the yolks and beat till cool and beginning to set. Pour into a
mould.


Rhenish Cream

  1 oz. isinglass
  1 pint water
  6 yolks
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  2 lemons
  2 glasses white wine
  4 ozs. powdered sugar

Soak the isinglass in ¹⁄₄ pint cold water. Add it to ¹⁄₄ pint boiling
water. Stir till dissolved. Beat the yolks till very light. Add the
cream, the juice of two lemons and the rind of one, the wine, sugar,
and strained isinglass. Strain all together through a fine sieve. Whisk
until it begins to set. Pour into glasses or moulds.


Rice Cream

  ¹⁄₄ lb. rice
  Milk
  ¹⁄₂ piece cinnamon
  Finely cut rind of ¹⁄₂ a lemon
  5 yolks
  5 table-spoons powdered sugar
  2 ozs. butter
  1¹⁄₂ pints cream
  1 oz. gelatine

Put the rice, cinnamon, and lemon peel in a little salted boiling milk,
and simmer until the rice is tender and the milk all absorbed.

Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar and beat again. Then add
the well-beaten yolks. Beat thoroughly together. Add the hot rice
gradually, and stir over the fire in a double boiler until the mixture
begins to thicken. Do not let it boil. Then pour into a basin and stir
occasionally.

Whip the cream (see p. 3). Melt the gelatine in a very little boiling
milk. Strain it and when slightly cooled stir it gradually into the
rice. Add the cream, mixing it lightly. Stir from time to time until
the mixtures begin to set. Then pour into a mould.

To the above a glass of rum or any other flavouring can be added.


Strawberry Cream

Line a basin with fine large strawberries and fill it with Bavarian
cream (see p. 98).


Strawberry or Raspberry Cream

  Sufficient fruit to make 1 pint of juice
  1 cup powdered sugar
  1 oz. gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ cup boiling water
  1 pint cream

Soak the gelatine in a little cold water. Mash the fruit and mix the
sugar with it. When the sugar has dissolved rub through a fine sieve.
Dissolve the gelatine in the boiling water. Strain slowly over the
fruit juice, beating it rapidly while doing so, until the mixture
begins to set. Stir in the whipped cream (see p. 3) and pour into a
porcelain mould.

Instead of fresh fruit the contents of a tin of apricots or peaches
mashed, or a grated tinned pine-apple, can be used.




Cold Puddings


                                PAGE

  Charlotte Russe                110

  Chocolate Blanc-Mange          110

     ” Meringue                  111

  Cornflour Pudding              111

  Cream Whip                     112

  Danish Pudding                 112

  Ginger Pudding                 113

  Gooseberry Fool                113

  Lemon Soufflé                  114

  Marrons à la Celestiné         114

  Meringues                      115

  Milk Jelly                     116

  Mousse aux fruits Givrés       116

  Orange Charlotte               117

  Pain aux Fruits                117

  Pine Apple Meringue            118

  Pines on Horseback             118

  Queen of Puddings              119

  Spanish Cream                  120

  Strawberry Sponge              120

  King’s Soufflé                 121


Charlotte Russe

  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  1 pint cream
  12 lady fingers
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  1 table-spoon sherry or liqueur

Set the gelatine to soak in cold water. Line a mould with lady fingers,
leaving a little space between each. Whip the cream (see p. 3). Add the
sugar, vanilla, and wine. Dissolve the gelatine in as little boiling
water as possible. Strain it very slowly through a fine strainer into
the cream, stirring rapidly all the time. Stir until the cream begins
to stiffen. Then pour it into the mould and set in a cold place or on
ice.

The mould may be lined with plain or rolled wafers instead of lady
fingers.

The cream may be flavoured with coffee, chocolate, or any fruit syrup.


Chocolate Blanc-Mange

  1¹⁄₂ ozs. gelatine
  1 quart milk
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  4 table-spoons grated chocolate
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Soak the gelatine for two hours. Add it to the warmed milk and sugar.
Let it heat gently. When the gelatine is melted, strain. Add the
chocolate and boil for five minutes, stirring continually. Take off the
fire. When nearly cold, beat for ten minutes with a whisk and add the
vanilla. Pour into a mould. Serve with cream.


Chocolate Meringue

  6 whites of eggs
  1 lb. powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  3 ozs. powdered chocolate

Beat three whites with the sugar for fifteen minutes. Then add the
rest of the whites one at a time, beating well. Add the vanilla and
chocolate. Drop on stiff note-paper which has been well buttered, and
place upon a board in a slow oven. Bake until dry.


Cornflour Pudding

  1 pint milk
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar
  3 whites of eggs
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla
  2 heaping table-spoons cornflour

Mix the cornflour to a smooth paste with a little of the milk. Put the
rest with the sugar in a double boiler. When boiling add the cornflour.
Stir till perfectly smooth and thick. Then leave to cook gently for
about twenty minutes. Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Stir them in
and continue stirring for two or three minutes. Take off the fire. Add
the vanilla. If not perfectly smooth, strain. Pour into a mould.


*Cream Whip

  1 pint cream
  1 cup sherry
  1 lemon
  ¹⁄₂ cup sugar
  2 whites of eggs

Whip the cream lightly. Add the sherry, rind and juice of the lemon,
sugar and the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Stir until the sugar is
melted. Skim off the froth and set it on a sieve. Fill custard glasses
with the cream. Put the froth on the top of each glass.


Danish Pudding

  ³⁄₄ cup pearl tapioca
  1¹⁄₂ pints boiling water
  ¹⁄₄ cup sugar
  ¹⁄₂ cup currant jelly
  Or fresh fruit juice

Soak the tapioca all night. Boil in the water till tender and
transparent. Stir frequently. Add the sugar, a little salt and the
jelly or fruit. Stir together till melted. Pour into a dish and set on
ice or in a cold place. Serve with cream.


*Ginger Pudding

  ¹⁄₂ oz. isinglass
  ¹⁄₂ pint milk
  3 ozs. butter
  2 ozs. powdered sugar
  4 eggs
  1 lemon
  1 small tea-spoon powdered ginger
  Preserved ginger and syrup

Dissolve the isinglass in a very little hot water. Add to it the
milk, butter, sugar and well-beaten yolks. Stir over the fire in a
double-boiler until it thickens, being careful not to let it boil.
Pour into a basin, and when nearly cold, but not set, add the powdered
ginger, the whites (beaten to a stiff froth), and the juice of the
lemon. Mix lightly together and pour into a buttered pudding basin to
set. Serve with a little chopped preserved ginger and syrup.


Gooseberry Fool

  1 pint green gooseberries
  ¹⁄₂ lb. sugar
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream

Simmer the gooseberries with the sugar in a very little water until
tender. Put through a sieve. Whip the cream slightly and beat well with
the gooseberry purée.

This can be made with any kind of fruit.


*Lemon Soufflé

  4 eggs
  7 ozs. powdered sugar
  6 leaves gelatine (over ¹⁄₄ of an oz.)
  3 lemons
  Whipped cream

Soak the gelatine for an hour in a little water. Beat the yolks and
sugar for fifteen minutes. Add the juice of two lemons and the grated
rind of one and a half. Whip the whites to a stiff froth. Stir them
lightly in. Take the gelatine out of the cold water. Dissolve it in
a very little hot water. When cooled pour it very gradually into the
mixture, which must be beaten all the while. Beat for five minutes in
a cold place. Pour into a silver or glass dish. When set, and it will
set very quickly, cover with sweetened whipped cream flavoured with a
quarter tea-spoon vanilla. Garnish with grated pistachios.


*Marrons à la Celestiné

Boil some chestnuts. Peel them and put them through a fine sieve.
Stir over the fire for two or three minutes with sugar to taste and
a little cream. Divide into four parts. To one add the yolk of an
egg, to another a little melted chocolate, to another a few drops of
cochineal, and to the fourth a little sage colouring. Mix each well.

Whip some cream with the white of an egg, and sweeten it and flavour
with vanilla. Pile it in the centre of a dish. Put the differently
coloured chestnut purées separately through a coarse sieve, and arrange
lightly around and on the cream.

This is equally good and simpler to make if colouring is not used. Pile
the sweetened and sifted chestnuts on a dish and cover with whipped
cream, or garnish with slices of sweetened orange.


Meringues

Whip four whites of eggs and a little salt until frothy, gradually
adding while doing so a breakfast-cup of powdered sugar. Beat until
perfectly smooth and firm. Cover a board with white paper. Drop the
mixture, one and a half table-spoons at a time, in oblong shapes upon
the paper. Put the board in a very slack oven. When a crust has been
formed, scoop out the soft centre of each meringue and turn it over to
dry inside.

If the meringues do not come off the paper easily, moisten it on the
under-side.


Milk Jelly

  1 oz. gelatine
  ³⁄₄ cup powdered sugar
  1³⁄₄ pints milk
  1 tea-spoon vanilla

Soak the gelatine in a little of the milk for an hour. Boil the sugar
and the rest of the milk together. Add the gelatine. When dissolved,
take from the fire. Add the flavouring and strain into a mould.


*Mousse aux Fruits Givrés

  ¹⁄₂ lb. sweet almonds
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon lemon juice
  3 whites of eggs
  3 ozs. powdered sugar
  Spinach colouring
  ¹⁄₂ pint whipped cream
  Sugared fruit

Blanch and pound the almonds with the lemon juice. Put through a fine
sieve. Add the whites and sugar. Beat well together. Stir over the fire
for two or three minutes. Take off and colour with green colouring. Put
the whipped cream in the centre of a dish. Put the almond paste through
a coarse sieve and arrange it lightly around the cream. Decorate with
sugared fruit (see p. 165).


Orange Charlotte

  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  1 cup powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ pint orange juice
  1 scant cup water
  4 eggs
  Lady fingers

Soak the gelatine. Boil the juice, water and sugar. Skim. Beat the
yolks thoroughly. Pour the syrup over them slowly, beating hard all the
time. Put into a double boiler and stir the mixture till it thickens.
Dissolve the gelatine in as little boiling water as possible. Put the
mixture in a good-sized basin and strain the gelatine into it, beating
continually. When cool, but not hard, stir in the whites beaten to a
stiff froth, and beat altogether till it begins to thicken. Then pour
the mixture into moulds lined with lady’s fingers. This Charlotte can
be made with the juice of any fruit, tinned or fresh.


*Pain aux Fruits

  1 pint of fruit pulp
  1 oz. gelatine
  1 gill cold water
  1 gill hot water

Crush some apricots, strawberries, raspberries, peaches, or
pine-apples. Sweeten and add a little liqueur and lemon juice, and,
if liked, blanched and chopped almonds. To each pint of fruit use one
ounce of gelatine which has been soaked in one gill of cold water
and dissolved in one gill of hot water. Stir well together until the
mixture begins to set. Pour into a _china_ mould. Serve with a rich
custard or cream.


*Pine Apple Meringue

  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  1 cup grated pine-apple
  4 table-spoons sugar
  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  7 meringue cases

Whip the cream. Dissolve the gelatine in a very little boiling water.
Strain it gradually over the cream, whisking it continually while doing
so. Stir in the grated pine-apple and the sugar. Beat in a cold place
until the mixture begins to set. Then arrange the meringues and cream
in layers. Garnish with crystallised fruits.


*Pines on Horseback

  Stale cake
  Pine apple
  Wine or liqueur

Cut the cake, which must be plain, into small rounds. Chop the
pine-apple and put it in a basin with plenty of sugar to sweeten. Soak
the cake in wine or liqueur. Pile the pine apple into little mounds
on each piece. To the juice add a very little wine or liqueur and
arrowroot (in the proportion of a tea-spoon to half a pint of juice).
Cook until thick and clear. Pour over the pine-apple and cake. Arrange
on a dish, covering each with a little whipped cream.


*Queen of Puddings

  1 pint of sponge cake
  10 ratafias
  2 ozs. sugar
  2 ozs. butter
  ¹⁄₂ rind of a lemon grated
  1 pint of milk
  4 eggs

Crumble the sponge cakes and ratafias finely. Pour the milk over them.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream. Add the yolks and beat again. Mix
well with the sponge cake. Beat the whites till frothy and stir them
in. When thoroughly mixed, turn into a buttered pudding-dish. Bake half
an hour. When cold turn out. Spread with a layer of jam and cover with
whipped cream.


*Spanish Cream

  1 pint milk
  ¹⁄₂ oz. gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ cup sugar
  3 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon vanilla

Soak the gelatine in the milk for two hours. Beat up the eggs till very
light. Add the sugar and beat again. Bring the milk and gelatine to
the boil. Pour over the eggs and sugar. Strain. Put on the fire in a
double boiler and stir till thick; but do not allow it to boil. Add the
vanilla and pour into a wet mould.


*Strawberry Sponge

  1 quart strawberries
  Powdered sugar
  4 whites of eggs
  ¹⁄₂ pint boiling water
  1 oz. isinglass

Mash the strawberries with sufficient sugar to sweeten and set them
aside for about an hour. Boil the water and two ounces of sugar for
twenty minutes. Add the gelatine which has been soaked for an hour
in a little cold water. Remove from the fire and strain. Put the
strawberries through a fine sieve. Add the syrup gradually, beating
hard for five minutes. Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Add them to
the strawberries and beat till the mixture begins to set. Put into a
wet mould. Serve with whipped cream.


*King’s Soufflé

  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  3 small lemons
  3 eggs
  ¹⁄₂ pint whipped cream
  ³⁄₄ oz. gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ gill water

Beat the yolks of the eggs. Add to them the sugar, the juice of three
lemons, and grated rind of two. Pour into a double-boiler, and whisk
continually until the mixture thickens. Do not let it boil. Strain
and set aside to cool. Melt the gelatine in the water, and add it to
the cold egg mixture. Add the cream and the whites whipped to a stiff
froth. Whip lightly together, and when beginning to set, pour into a
mould. Garnish with crystallised violets or rose-leaves.




Pastry


                             PAGE

  Plain Pastry--I.            125

     ”    ”     II.           125

     ”    ”  (Short)          125

  Puff Pastry                 126

  Rich Crust                  126

  Short Crust for Tartlets    127

  Biscuit Paste for Tartlets  127


General Directions

In making pastry, the colder the hands of the maker, the water and the
room, the better. A marble slab is the best thing on which to make it:
otherwise a hard board which is kept for pastry only should be used.

Use iced water for mixing, when possible. Pastry will be flakier if set
on ice before it is finally rolled out for use. The flour used should
be very dry and should be sifted with a little salt. Use the best flour
only and fresh butter, or half butter, half lard.

Use as little water as possible.

Never knead pastry.

Use the hands as little as possible. Mix with a knife unless otherwise
specified.

Bake in a moderate or quick oven.

Baking powder, in the proportion of one tea-spoon to each quart of
flour, may be added when eggs are not used. The baking powder should be
sifted twice with the flour before mixing.

It is better to bake pastry separately from the fruit when possible. It
will thus be much crisper. To do this fill the dish which is to be used
with stiff crumpled paper, over which a smooth and well-buttered piece
should be laid. Cover with the pastry and bake. Remove the pastry and
fill the dish with well-sweetened stewed fruit. Moisten the edges of
the dish with white of egg and replace the crust.

In making open tarts and tartlets, when the tin is lined with pastry it
can be filled with rice and baked. This is in order to keep the crust
crisp. The rice must be taken out and the fruit or jam put in its place
just before serving.


Plain Pastry--I

  12 ozs. flour
  3 ozs. butter
  3 ozs. lard
  Salt

Cut up the lard and butter, very finely, in the flour. With a knife,
mix with a little water. Roll and fold up three or four times.


Plain Pastry--II

  1 lb. flour
  ¹⁄₂ lb. butter
  Cold water

Rub the butter into the flour. Add cold water gradually to make a stiff
paste, mixing with a knife. Roll out quickly.


*Plain Pastry Crust--III

(For Tarts)

  4 ozs. butter
  2 ozs. lard
  10 ozs. flour

Beat the butter to a cream. Rub butter and lard very carefully into the
flour, adding a little salt. Mix with as little water as possible.


*Puff Pastry

  1 lb. fresh butter
  1 lb. dry sifted flour
  Salt

Work the flour well with a little water into a still dough. Flour
the pastry board slightly. Roll out the dough until one inch thick.
Flatten the butter and put in the centre of the dough. Fold the edges
up over the butter and roll out very lightly five times, always rolling
outwards, and using as little flour as possible on the board. The
butter must on no account be allowed to work through the paste. Set
aside in a cold place, or on ice, for at least an hour. When making
tarts, &c., cut off a piece at a time, instead of using the whole
quantity, and roll out very lightly. Bake in a rather hot oven. This is
a simple and excellent receipt.


*Rich Crust--IV

  10 ozs. flour
  8 ozs. butter
  Juice of a lemon

Rub two ounces of the butter into the flour. Mix with the lemon juice
and a little water. Divide the rest of the butter into three parts.
Roll out the paste half an inch thick. Cut one lot of butter into small
pieces and dab them on the paste. Fold it over three times lengthwise,
and then three times the other way. Roll out again. Repeat the process
twice, when the butter will be used up.

This receipt may be made with baking powder (see General Directions).


*Short Crust--V

(For Tartlets)

  1 lb. flour
  ³⁄₄ lb. butter
  2 table-spoons powdered sugar
  Yolks of 3 eggs
  Water
  Salt

Rub the butter into the flour and sugar. Beat the yolks with a little
water. Stir into the flour with a knife until smooth.


Biscuit Paste--VI

(For Open Tarts and Tartlets)

  1 lb. flour
  ¹⁄₄ lb. sugar
  6 yolks
  Milk

Sift the flour and sugar together. Stir in the eggs with a knife. Make
into a stiff paste with some milk (about 1 gill).




Open Tarts and Tartlets


                             PAGE

  Almond Tartlets--I.         129

     ”      ”      II.        129

  Chocolate Cream Tartlets    130

  Cream Tartlets              130

  Cream and Fruit Tartlets    131

  Fruit Tartlets              132

  Lemon Cheesecakes           132

  Mincemeat                   133

  Orange Tartlets             133

  Strawberry Tartlets         134


Almond Tartlets--I

  ¹⁄₄ lb. sweet almonds
  5 ozs. powdered sugar
  10 drops vanilla
  6 whites of eggs
  A few drops of lemon juice

Blanch and pound the almonds with the lemon juice. Add the sugar. Whip
the whites to a stiff froth. Stir in the almonds, sugar and vanilla.
Bake in a moderate oven in patty pans lined with puff pastry.


Almond Tartlets--II

  5 ozs. potato flour
  8 yolks
  3 whites
  2¹⁄₂ ozs. butter
  2 lemons
  2¹⁄₂ ozs. sweet almonds
  ¹⁄₄ oz. bitter almonds

Blanch and pound the almonds. Melt the butter. Grate the rind of the
lemons. Beat the yolks. Mix all thoroughly together except the whites.
Beat them to a froth, and stir them in last.

Line two round tins with short crust (see p. 127). Spread it with
apricot jam, and pour the almond mixture over it. Bake in a slow oven.


Chocolate Cream Tartlets

  1 pint milk
  1¹⁄₂ ozs. grated chocolate
  1¹⁄₂ ozs. flour
  ¹⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  1 oz. butter
  4 eggs

Boil the chocolate and milk together. Stir in the flour, mixed smooth
in a little cold milk. Stir until it thickens. Strain. Pour over the
well beaten yolks. Add the sugar and butter. Stir over the fire until
just below boiling point.

Line small tins with a short crust. Fill with the cream and bake. Make
a meringue of two whites and two table-spoons of powdered sugar (see p.
4). Put in the oven to brown slightly.


Cream Tartlets

  1 pint cream
  ¹⁄₂ pint milk
  2 ozs. powdered sugar
  Peel of one lemon
  8 yolks

Put the cream and milk into a sauce-pan. When they boil, add the sugar,
the very finely-pared lemon peel and a little salt. Stir for a few
moments. Pour the cream over the well beaten yolks. Set back on the
fire. When thick, strain into a basin. Set aside in a cool place till
wanted. Line some small tins with puff paste. Fill with uncooked rice.
Bake. Take out the rice and fill with custard. Sprinkle with lemon
sugar (see p. 164).


Cream and Fruit Tartlets

  For cream:--
  1 tea-cup cream or milk
  2 whites of eggs
  1 table-spoon powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon cornflour

Line a dish with short crust. Fill it closely with raspberries,
strawberries, cherries or other fruit and sufficient sugar. Cover with
crust, but do not press it down round the edges. When baked, lift off
the upper crust and fill with cream.

CREAM.--Scald the milk or cream. Add the whites beaten to a stiff
froth, the sugar and the cornflour mixed smooth with a little cold
milk. Boil three minutes, stirring continually. Set aside until quite
cold.


Fruit Tartlets

Stew the fruit until tender, taking care to keep it whole, in plenty of
water and sugar. Take out the fruit gently with a skimmer when done.
Add a few drops of lemon juice to the syrup. Boil it until reduced to
a thick syrup. Line several small tins with a short crust (No. IV. or
V.). Fill with uncooked rice and bake. Take out the rice. Arrange the
fruit in them and pour the syrup over.


Lemon Cheesecakes

  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  1 lb. loaf sugar
  6 eggs
  3 lemons

Melt the sugar in the lemon juice. Add the butter, eggs (taking out the
whites of two) and the grated rind of two lemons. Stir until thick and
of the consistency of honey. A few pounded almonds may be added.

Line small tins with puff or short pastry, fill with the mixture and
bake.


Mincemeat

  2 lbs. suet
  3 lbs. raisins
  2 lbs. sultanas
  2 lbs. currants
  1 lb. mixed candied peel
  2 lbs. moist sugar
  1 dozen sour apples
  4 lemons, grated peel and juice
  2 tea-spoons mixed spice
  2  ” ground ginger
  ¹⁄₄ lb. pounded sweet almonds
  2 grated nutmegs
  ¹⁄₂ pint brandy
  ¹⁄₂ pint sherry

Mix the sugar, spices and very finely-chopped suet. Chop the fruit, and
peel as fine as possible. Mix all well together, adding the brandy and
wine last. It is best made several weeks before using.


Orange Tartlets

  7 oranges
  ¹⁄₂ pint syrup
  1 lemon
  Puff or short paste

Peel six oranges. Scrape off all the white skin with a sharp knife.
Divide into sections, removing all the rest of the white and seeds.
Drop them very carefully into boiling syrup (see p. 151) and let them
simmer three minutes. Take the pieces out gently, and set them on a
sieve to drain over a basin.

To the syrup add the juice of an orange and lemon and the juice that
drains from the cooked oranges. Reduce it by boiling till very thick.

Line some patty pans with short or puff paste. Fill them with uncooked
rice and bake quickly. Remove the rice, arrange the oranges on the
pastry and pour the syrup over them just before serving.


Strawberry Tartlets

  1 lb. loaf sugar
  1 gill water
  1 wine-glass brandy or sherry
  Strawberries

Make a syrup of the sugar and water. Add the brandy or sherry. Reduce
until thick. Pour this syrup over a number of fine strawberries.

Line some small tins with short crust (No. 125). Fill them with
uncooked rice and bake in a quick oven.

Turn out the rice and fill with the strawberries and syrup. Serve hot.




American Pies


                     PAGE

  Apple Pie           137

  Cocoanut Pie        137

  Custard Pie         138

  Lemon Pie--I.       138

    ”    ”   II.      139

  Mincemeat           140

  Mock Mincemeat      141

  Pine-Apple Pie      141


General Directions

The following American receipts are all good. Care, however, must be
taken in baking that there is a good bottom heat, or the under crust
will be sodden.

The pies should be made in shallow tins about 8 to 9 inches in
diameter. Puff paste may be used; but No. II. pastry (see p. 125) is
very satisfactory. It should be rolled very thin.

Where a covering of pastry is used, it should be slit across the centre
in three places, about two inches long, to allow the steam to escape.


Apple Pie

  1 lb. sour apples
  7 ozs. brown sugar

Roll out pie crust No. II. very thin. Line a tin with it. Pare and core
the apples and cut them in thin sections. Arrange them symmetrically on
the undercrust. Add the sugar. Cover with a thin overcrust, moistening
it with water at the edges and pressing down. Make three slits about
two inches long in the centre of the crust to allow the steam to
escape. Bake in a moderate oven.

Wellington apples should be used, if possible.


Cocoanut Pie

  ¹⁄₂ lb. grated cocoanut
  ³⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  6 ozs. butter
  5 whites of eggs
  2 table-spoons rose water
  1 gill white wine

Cream the butter and sugar. Beat for fifteen minutes with the rosewater
and wine. Stir in the cocoanut and then the whites, beaten to a stiff
froth, lightly and quickly. Pour into a tin lined with No. II. pastry
or puff pastry. Serve cold, sprinkled with powdered sugar.


Custard Pie

  3 eggs
  1 table-spoon sifted flour
  3 table-spoons powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  1 pint scalded milk

Beat the yolks till light and creamy. Sift the sugar and flour
together. Add it to the yolks. Add a little salt and the vanilla. Beat
the whites to a stiff froth. Whip them in. Add the cold scalded milk
gradually. Put into a tin lined with puff pastry. Bake thirty minutes.


Lemon Pie--I

  2 lemons
  3 eggs
  2 table-spoons flour
  12 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 pint water
  1 oz. butter

Grate the rind of the lemons. Pare off with a sharp knife all the
white skin. Cut the lemons into very small pieces, removing all skin
and pips. Put them in an enamelled saucepan. Add the sugar, flour and
two-thirds of the grated rind and the water. When hot, stir in the
beaten eggs. Remove from the fire when just below boiling point. Stir
in the butter. When cold, pour into a tin lined with thin pastry. Cover
with pastry and bake.


Lemon Pie--II

  2 lemons
  1¹⁄₂ cups powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon corn-flour
  3 eggs
  2 cups of water
  Butter size of a walnut

Mix the sugar, flour and grated rind of the lemons thoroughly. Beat the
yolks till light and creamy. Add to the sugar and beat well. Stir in
the water. Set on the fire in a double boiler. Stir continually. When
hot, add the butter. Stir till thick but do not allow it to boil. When
cool pour it into a rather deep tin lined with No. II. pastry or puff
pastry, and bake. Whip the whites to a froth, adding gradually three
table-spoons powdered sugar. Spread on the pie when cold. Put in the
oven to brown a little. Serve cold.


Mincemeat

  ³⁄₄ lb. meat
  1 lb. suet
  2 lbs. raisins
  1 lb. currants
  4¹⁄₂ lbs. chopped apples
  1 lb. golden syrup
  2¹⁄₂ lbs. brown sugar
  ¹⁄₂ lb. mixed peel
  ¹⁄₂ table-spoon salt
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon white pepper
  1 nutmeg, grated
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon ground cloves
  1 tea-spoon ground cinnamon
  1 bottle sherry
  ¹⁄₂ pint brandy

Use lean beef. Chop very fine and remove all gristle and fat. Mix all
well together, adding the wine and brandy last.

Bake as directed for apple pie or in small covered tarts, using No. II.
pastry.

Add a little lemon-juice to the mincemeat each time it is used.


Mock Mincemeat

  6 toast biscuits
  ¹⁄₂ pint molasses or syrup
  ¹⁄₂ pint brown sugar
  ¹⁄₂ pint cider vinegar
  ³⁄₄ pint melted butter
  ¹⁄₂ pint chopped raisins
  ¹⁄₂ pint currants
  2 well beaten eggs
  1 dessert-spoon allspice
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon grated nutmeg
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon cloves
  1 tea-spoon salt
  ¹⁄₂ tea-spoon black pepper
  1 gill brandy

Crush the biscuits. Mix all well together, adding the brandy last of
all.


Pine-Apple Pie

  ¹⁄₂ lb. grated pine-apple
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₄ lb. butter
  1 gill thick cream
  3 eggs

Beat the butter until creamy. Add the sugar and beaten yolks, beating
all till very light. Whip the cream. Add it to the grated pine-apple.
Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Stir them lightly in. Mix altogether.
Bake with an undercrust of puff pastry or a short crust.




Ices


General Directions

If a machine is used (and the best should be obtained) it will take
about half an hour to freeze a cream or water ice. The cylinder should
be set in the pail filled with finely crushed ice and _rock_ salt, in
the proportion of one part of salt to three or four of ice. To break
the ice, wrap carefully in a flannel and pound it with a hammer or
flat iron until it is broken into very small pieces. Pack it solidly
round the cylinder in layers of about three inches, divided by layers
of salt. As it is most important that there should be sufficient salt,
it is best to measure both ice and salt accurately with a saucer.
The cylinder should be turned slowly for the first ten minutes, then
quickly. When the mixture is frozen take out the metal beater, scrape
the ice from the sides of the cylinder, beat it well and pack it firmly
down. Put on the cover, fix the cylinder down into the pail, and cover
with a piece of old felt or carpeting which has been wetted with salt
and water. Leave until it is required.

Water should not be drawn off from the pail until there is so much that
the cylinder begins to float. When it does, draw off the water and add
more salt and ice.

If the ice is to be put into a mould, beat it well and pack firmly into
the mould. Cover closely and pack in ice.

Care must be taken in removing the cover of a cylinder or mould that
none of the salt mixture falls into the ice.

Ices can easily be made without a machine. The cylinder is replaced
by a long round biscuit or coffee tin, about four inches in diameter.
Put the tin in a pail. Pack it round with ice and salt as above. Pour
the mixture which is to be frozen into the tin and beat it hard for
ten minutes. Put on the lid firmly. Cover it with ice and then cover
the whole thing with a thick blanket or piece of carpet. Leave it for
an hour. Remove the ice on lid of the tin, wipe it and take it off.
Scrape off the frozen mixture at the sides and beat very hard again
for ten minutes. Replace the cover, ice, salt and blanket, and leave
for five or six hours, only looking occasionally to see if the water
must be drawn off and more ice and salt added. This, although a lengthy
process, is very simple and inexpensive and most successful.

For beating, a long wooden spatula, thin at the end and about the size
of a carving knife, should be used.

It is essential that rock salt and not common salt be used. Snow can
be used instead of ice, but is not quite so good.

To take out ice, dip the cylinder quickly in hot water and shake it
gently.

Scald the tins in which ices are made directly they are emptied, and
dry in the oven.

If cream ices are to be put in moulds it will be found more
satisfactory to add to them a little dissolved gelatine in the
proportion of ¹⁄₂ oz. of gelatine to two quarts of cream.

Cream ices are excellent served with a hot chocolate, fruit, or wine
sauce. The sauce should be served separately.




Cream Ices


                            PAGE

  Cream Ice--I.              146

    ”    ”   II.             146

  Brown Bread Cream Ice      147

  Caramel Cream Ice          147

  Chestnut Cream Ice         148

  Coffee Cream Ice           148

  Fruit Cream Ice            148

  Strawberry Cream Ice       149

  Tutti Frutti               149


*Cream Ice--I

  1 quart cream
  1 cup powdered sugar
  1 table-spoon vanilla

Scald the cream. Add the sugar. When it is melted set aside to cool.
Flavour when cold. Freeze.

The whites of three eggs beaten to a foam, but not stiff, may be added
to the cream just before it is put into the freezer.


Cream Ice--II

(Frozen Custard)

  1 quart milk
  6 yolks
  1¹⁄₄ cups powdered sugar
  1-2 pints thick cream
  1-2 table-spoons vanilla

Make a custard (see p. 15) with the milk, sugar and yolks. Strain and,
when cold, add the cream, flavouring, etc. If the larger quantity of
cream has been used add more sugar. Freeze.

The custard can be made with cream instead of milk.

To these two creams, fruit, nuts, pounded macaroons, lemon juice,
pounded ginger and rum, and any liqueur, can be added.


Brown Bread Cream Ice

  1 quart cream
  1 tea-cup brown bread-crumbs
  ¹⁄₂ lb. sugar

Dry the brown bread and crumble and sift to very fine crumbs. Add them
to the cream and sugar. When the sugar has melted, mix well together
and freeze.


*Caramel Cream Ice

  8 ozs. powdered sugar
  6 yolks of eggs
  1 pint milk
  1 pint cream
  1 dessert-spoon vanilla

Put the sugar in an iron sauce-pan with a very little water, and leave
it until it becomes a rich brown. Let it become cold. Pound it and
add the milk and yolks. Stir the mixture in a double boiler until it
thickens. Strain, and when cold add the vanilla and cream.


*Chestnut Cream Ice

  6 ozs. chestnuts
  10 ozs. powdered sugar
  1¹⁄₂ pints cream
  Yolks of 8 eggs
  1 dessert-spoon vanilla
  ¹⁄₂ pint whipped cream

Boil, peel and rub through a fine sieve some chestnuts, measuring after
they have been sifted. Beat all well together for ten minutes. Stir
over the fire in a double boiler till thick. Strain through a coarse
hair sieve. Add another ¹⁄₂ pint rich whipped cream. Freeze in a mould.


Coffee Cream Ice

  2 ozs. best whole coffee, green or roasted
  4 yolks of eggs
  1 quart cream
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar

Mix all together. Put in a double boiler and cook until the mixture
thickens but does not boil. Strain through a sieve and freeze.


Fruit Cream Ice

To a cream ice (No. I. or II.) add, when partly frozen, any
well-sweetened ripe or tinned fruits cut into small pieces. Beat well
together, and cover tightly to freeze.


*Strawberry Cream Ice

  ¹⁄₂ pint strawberry juice
  1 quart cream
  Powdered sugar

Mash a sufficient quantity of strawberries to fill, when put through a
sieve, a ¹⁄₂ pint measure. Add them to the cream. Add sugar until the
mixture is very sweet. When the sugar is melted, freeze.


Tutti Frutti

  1 quart cream ice (I. or II.)
  2 table-spoons maraschino
  ¹⁄₂ lb. candied fruit, finely chopped

Add the maraschino to the cream. When partly frozen, add the fruit and
beat well together. Cover closely.




Water Ices


                                PAGE

  Syrup                          151

  Cherry Water Ice               151

  Frozen Macedoine of Fruit      151

  Frozen Punch                   152

  Fruit Water Ice                152

  Lemon Water Ice                153

  Maraschino Punch               153

  Orange Water Ice               154

  Pine Apple Water Ice           154

  Raspberry Water Ice            155

  Strawberry Punch               155


Syrup

(For Water Ices, etc.)

  3 lbs. loaf sugar
  1 quart water
  1 dessert-spoon white of egg

Mix the egg with the water. Add the sugar. Let it melt. Boil and skim
until perfectly clear. Set aside to cool.


*Cherry Water Ice

  1 pint cherry juice
  ¹⁄₂ pint water
  1 pint syrup (see above)
  1 tea-spoon lemon juice

Prepare the juice by pounding the cherries and putting them through a
sieve, adding the water gradually whilst doing this so that all the
juice may be carried through. Add the syrup and lemon juice.


Frozen Macedoine of Fruit with Champagne

Carefully prepare some fruit as for fruit salad (see p. 33), sweetening
it well with sugar. Pour over the fruit a bottle of champagne. Leave
for four hours. Pack in ice for two hours. Serve in glasses.


*Frozen Punch

  1 pint lemon juice
  1 pint syrup
  ¹⁄₂ pint water
  1 gill brandy
  1 gill rum
  5 whites of eggs

Mix the lemon juice, syrup, water, brandy and rum together. Put in a
freezer. When nearly frozen add the whites beaten to a stiff froth.
When well mixed serve in glasses.


Fruit Water Ice

  1 quart fruit
  1 cup cold water
  2 cups powdered sugar
  3 whites of eggs

Crush the fruit and rub it through a sieve. Add the sugar. Stir until
it is dissolved. Add the water and unbeaten whites. Freeze in a
freezing machine, turning the mixture until it is frozen.


Lemon Water Ice

  6 lemons
  ¹⁄₂ lb. lump sugar
  1 quart water
  1 lb. powdered sugar
  Whites of 4 eggs

Rub off the peel of the lemons on to lump sugar. Make a syrup with the
lump sugar, powdered sugar and water (see p. 151). Add the juice of the
lemons. Strain. When cool add the whites beaten to a froth, and freeze.


Maraschino Punch

  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  1 quart water
  ¹⁄₂ pint maraschino
  1 lemon
  1 orange

Make a syrup of the sugar and water (see p. 151). When cold add the
maraschino and the juice of the lemon and orange. Strain. Freeze.


Orange Water Ice

  1 table-spoon gelatine
  ¹⁄₂ cup boiling water
  1 cup sugar
  1 cup cold water
  1 pint orange juice

Soak the gelatine. Dissolve it in the boiling water. When dissolved
add the sugar, cold water and orange juice. Stir till the sugar is
dissolved. Strain. Freeze.


*Pine-Apple Water Ice

  1¹⁄₄ lbs. pine apple
  ¹⁄₂ pint water
  1 pint prepared syrup
  2 lemons

Grate and mash one pound of pine-apple, fresh if possible. Add the
syrup (see p. 151), the juice of the lemons and the water. Put through
a sieve. Cut the rest of the pine-apple into very small pieces. Stir it
into the mixture and freeze.


Raspberry Water Ice

  1 pint juice
  1 pint sugar
  1 pint water
  Juice of 2 lemons
  1 table-spoon gelatine

Follow directions for orange water ice.


*Strawberry Punch

  1 quart strawberries
  2¹⁄₂ cups powdered sugar
  ³⁄₄ cup sweet white wine or champagne
  1¹⁄₂ cups water

Put the strawberries in a dish and cover with the sugar. Let them stand
for an hour. Put through a hair sieve. Add the wine and water. Put into
a freezer. Stir till well mixed, then leave till frozen.




Iced Puddings, Mousses, Parfaits, etc.


                                          PAGE

  Caramel Mousse                           157

  Chestnut Mousse                          157

  Frozen Fruit                             158

  Nesselrode Pudding                       158

  Parfait (Chocolate)                      159

    ” (Coffee)                             159

  Strawberry Ice                           160

  Strawberry Mousse                        160

  Vanilla and Chocolate Soufflé            161

  Cream Ice enclosed in a hot Soufflé      161


*Caramel Mousse

  9 yolks of eggs
  ³⁄₄ lb. powdered sugar
  1¹⁄₂ pints milk
  1 pint whipped cream

Make a custard (see p. 15) of the yolks, milk and quarter a pound of
sugar. Strain it and set to cool.

Stir half a pound sugar over the fire in an iron saucepan until a rich
brown. Add a little water and boil for three minutes. Beat the custard
over ice for ten minutes. Add the syrup slowly and the whipped cream.
Beat well together. Fill a mould with it. Cover with a sheet of paper
and a lid. Pack in ice and salt. Leave for an hour.


*Chestnut Mousse

  6 ozs. prepared chestnuts
  6 ozs. powdered sugar
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  ¹⁄₂ pint whipped cream

Boil, peel and pound some chestnuts. Put them through a fine sieve.
Take six ounces of sifted chestnuts and mix with the sugar and vanilla.
Beat till smooth. Add the cream and more sugar if required. Pour into
a mould. Cover with a lid and seal the joints with a paste of flour and
water. Pack in ice and leave for one hour.


*Frozen Fruit

  1 tin apricots or peaches
  2 cups powdered sugar
  1 quart water

Cut the fruit in small pieces. Add the sugar and water. When the sugar
is dissolved, freeze.

One pint whipped cream can be added to the fruit when partly frozen.

Any tinned or fresh fruit can be used. Apricots, peaches, pine-apple
and strawberries are best.


Nesselrode Pudding

  40 chestnuts
  4 yolks
  ¹⁄₂ cup powdered sugar
  1 pint milk
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream
  1 tea-spoon vanilla
  ¹⁄₄ lb. shredded candied pine apple
  ¹⁄₂ tea-cup maraschino

Make a custard of the yolks, milk and sugar (see p. 15). Boil, peel,
pound and put through a fine sieve the chestnuts. Mix with the cold
custard and vanilla and put in the freezer. When nearly firm add the
fruit, cream and maraschino (this may be omitted). Beat well together
and leave until frozen. Garnish with angelica and candied cherries.


*Parfait (Chocolate)

  1 pint milk
  10 yolks
  ¹⁄₂ lb. powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₄ lb. chocolate
  1 dessert-spoon vanilla
  ¹⁄₂ pint cream

Make a custard of the milk, yolks and sugar (see p. 15). Melt the
chocolate with a very little water. Add it to the custard. Put through
a fine sieve. Stir over ice till cold. Add the whipped cream and beat
well together. Pack in ice and leave two hours.


*Parfait (Coffee)

  1 pint cream
  1 cup powdered sugar
  ¹⁄₂ cup strong clear coffee

Mix together. Whip on ice. Take off the froth and put into a freezer or
mould. Do not touch it. Leave for two hours.


*Strawberry Cream

  ¹⁄₂ lb. sugar
  1 pint water
  1 quart strawberries
  ¹⁄₂ pint whipped cream

Boil the sugar and water for half an hour. Add the strawberries. Simmer
gently for quarter of an hour. Take off the fire and cool. When cold
put in a freezer and stir occasionally till frozen. When frozen stir in
the cream, which can be slightly sweetened.


*Strawberry Mousse

  1 lb. strawberries
  1 cup powdered sugar
  1¹⁄₂ pints cream

Crush the strawberries and put them through a fine hair sieve. Put in
an enamelled sauce-pan with a little sugar and stir continually over
the fire till well mixed. Pour into a basin and set it on ice, stirring
until it is cold. Whip the cream with the rest of the sugar. Mix with
the fruit. Line a mould with paper. Fill it. Cover it with a round of
paper and a lid, which should be sealed with a paste made of flour and
water. Pack in ice and leave for an hour.


*Vanilla and Chocolate Soufflé

  16 yolks of eggs
  1 cup syrup
  1 cup water
  1 dessert-spoon vanilla
  1 pint whipped cream
  Chocolate

Beat the yolks, syrup (see p. 151) and water together thoroughly. Pass
through a fine sieve. Put into a double boiler. Stir until thick but
do not let it boil. Warm a bowl. Pour the custard into it. Add the
vanilla. Beat for five minutes. Stir in the whipped cream and pour into
a large mould. Pack in ice and leave for two hours. Uncover the mould
and pour on to it a cup of _cold_ melted chocolate flavoured with a
little vanilla. Replace the cover and leave another two hours.


Cream Ice Enclosed in a Hot Soufflé

Make a soufflé of the required flavour in a large soufflé dish. Have
ready a cream ice, frozen stone hard, about four inches less in
diameter than the soufflé dish. When the soufflé is nearly baked, take
it out of the oven, remove the brown top, and a little of the soft
centre. Put in the ice, cover with the soft mixture and the brown cover
and put back into the oven for a few moments. Considerable deftness and
great quickness are necessary if this sweet is to be successful.




Sugars


                             PAGE

  Coloured Sugars             164

  Orange and Lemon Sugar      164

  Sugared Fruits              165


Coloured Sugars

On to some powdered sugar drop a few drops of any colouring. Stir well
and quickly so that the sugar may be evenly coloured. When dry, crush
between paper if necessary. Keep in a tin in a dry place.


Orange and Lemon Sugar

  ¹⁄₂ lb. loaf sugar
  3 oranges or lemons

Pare off the yellow rind of oranges, tangerines or lemons very finely.
Let it dry thoroughly. Pound it in a mortar with the sugar. Pass
through a fine sieve and keep in a dry place.

Or the rind may be rubbed off on lumps of sugar, which must then be
dried and very finely crushed.


Sugared Fruits

  White of egg
  Powdered sugar
  Strawberries, cherries, grapes,
  red or white currants

Beat the white of an egg till frothy. Dip each fruit into it and then
roll it in powdered sugar. Place on white paper and dry in a very slow
oven.


THE END




Index


  Albemarle Pudding, 66.

  Almonds, to blanch, 4.

     ” to pound, 4.

  Almond Soufflé, 62.

     ” Tartlets, 129.

  Apple and Apricot Charlotte, 66.

  Apple Custard, 67.

     ” Pie, 137.

  Apples, Baked, 26.

     ” Stewed, 29.

  Apple and Tapioca Pudding, 7.


  Bain Marie, 3.

  Baked Apples, 26.

     ” Bananas, 26.

  Bavarian Cream, 98.

  Biscuit Paste, 127.

  Boiled Puddings, 2.

  Bread and Butter Pudding, 7.

  Bread Pudding, 8.

    ” and Rum Pudding, 68.

  Brown Bread Cream Ice, 147.

  Butter, How to beat, 5.


  Calf’s Foot Jelly, 91.

  Caramel Mousse, 157.

  Charlotte Russe, 110.

  Chartreuse of Orange, 100.

     ” Strawberries, 101.

  Cherry Pudding, 68.

     ” Water Ice, 151.

  Chestnut Cream, 102.

      ”      ” Ice, 148.

      ” Mousse, 157.

  Chocolate Bavarois, 103.

     ” Blanc Mange, 110.

     ” Cream Tartlets, 130.

     ” to melt, 3.

     ” Parfait, 159.

     ” Soufflé, 55, 62, 63.

  Christmas Plum Pudding, 69, 70.

  Citron Puddings, 73.

  Claret Jelly, 92.

  Cocoanut Pie, 137.

  Coffee Cream Ice, 148.

     ” Parfait, 159.

     ” Soufflé, 55.

  Coloured Sugars, 164.

  Cornflour Pudding, 111.

  Cranberry Jelly, 92.

  Cream and Fruit Tartlets, 131.

    ” Ices, 146-149.

    ” Ice with hot Soufflé, 161.

  Creams, 98-108.

  Cream Soufflé, 64.

    ” Tartlets, 130.

    ” Whip, 112.

    ” to whip, 3.

  Crème aux Fruits, 103.

    ” Brûlée, 22.

    ” Hollandaise, 104.

    ” Renversée, 23.

  Currants, to clean, 2.

  Custard Pie, 138.

  Custards, Baked, 20-24.

     ”   Boiled, 15-17.


  Danish Pudding, 112.

  Dutch Apple Cake, 70.


  Fig Pudding, 71.

  Figs, Stewed, 30.

  Flaming Peaches, 27.

  Foam Omelet, 51.

  French Pancakes, 38.

  Friar’s Omelet, 71.

  Fritters, 42-47.

  Frozen Fruit, 158.

    ” Macedoine of Fruit, 151.

    ” Punch, 152.

  Fruit Cream Ice, 148.

    ” Fritters, 43.

    ” Salad, 33.

    ” Stewed, 28.

    ” Tartlets, 132.

    ” Water Ice, 152.


  Garnish for Custards, 14.

  Gâteau de Riz, 9.

  Gelatine, 3.

    ” Jelly, 91.

  Gelée Fouettée, 93.

  Ginger Pudding, 72.

     ”      ”  , 113.

  Gooseberry Fool, 113.

    ” Pudding, 72.

  Grated Pine-apple, 27.


  Henriettes, 44.


  Italian Mousse, 73.


  Jelly Milk, 116.

  Jellies, 91-96.


  King’s Soufflé, 121.


  Lemon Cheesecakes, 132.

    ” Froth, 93.

    ” Pie, 138, 139.

    ” Soufflé, 64, 114.

    ” Sugar, 164.

    ” Water-Ice, 153.


  Macedoine of Fruit, Frozen, 151.

  Maraschino Jelly, 94.

    ” Punch, 153.

    ” Soufflé, 56.

  Marmalade Pudding, 74.

  Marrons à la Célestine, 114.

  Measuring, 1.

  Meringue for Puddings, 4.

  Meringues, 115.

    ” Chocolate, 111.

  Milk Jelly, 116.

  Mincemeat, 133.

    ” 140.

    ” 141.

  Miroton, 27.

  Mock Mincemeat, 141.

  Mousse aux fruits givrés, 116.

  Mousse à la Mangara, 74.

  Mousses, Frozen, 157.


  Nesselrode Pudding, 158.

  Noyau Cream, 105.


  Omelette Soufflée, 56.

  Omelets, 50-52.

  Orange Baskets, 94.

    ” Charlotte, 117.

    ” and Cocoanut Salad, 34.

    ” Cream, 105.

    ” Fritters, 44.

    ” Jelly, 94.

    ” Omelet, 51.

    ” Salad, 34.

    ” Sugar, 164.

    ” Tartlets, 133.

    ” Water-Ice, 154.


  Pain aux Fruits, 117.

  Palace Pudding, 75.

  Pancakes, 37-39.

  Parfaits, 159.

  Pastry, 125-127.

  Peaches, Stewed, 30.

  Pears, ”, 31, 32.

  Pies, 137-141.

  Pine-apple Fritters, 45.

    ” Grated, 27.

    ” Meringue, 118.

    ” Pie, 141.

    ” and Rice Mould, 75.

    ” Salad, 34.

    ” Water-Ice, 154.

  Pines on Horseback, 118.

  Plain Rice Pudding, 10.

  Plum Pudding, 76.

  Portuguese Fritters, 45.

  Prune Jelly, 95.


  Queen of Puddings, 119.


  Raisins, to stone, 2.

  Raspberry Cream, 108.

    ” Water Ice, 155.

  Rhenish Cream, 106.

  Rhubarb Jelly, 95.

  Rice Cream, 9, 107.

    ” Pancakes, 39.

    ” Pudding with Apples, 10.

    ” Soufflé, 11.

  Rum Omelet, 52.

    ” Tutti Frutti, 28.


  Sauces, 80-87.

  Soufflé Fritters, 46.

    ” Frozen, 161.

    ” Puddings, 62-64.

    ” Royal, 57.

  Soufflés, 55-59.

  Spanish Cream, 120.

  Stewed Apples, 29.

    ” Figs, 30.

    ” Fruit, 28.

    ” Peaches, 30.

    ” Pears, 31, 32.

    ” Prunes, 32.

  Strawberry Cream, 108.

    ” Cream-Ice, 149.

    ” Fritters, 47.

    ” Ice, 160.

    ” Mousse, 160.

    ” Punch, 155.

  Strawberries and Cream, 33.

  Strawberry Shortcake, 77.

    ” Soufflé, 58.

    ” Sponge, 120.

    ” Tartlets, 134.

  Suet, to chop, 2.

  Sugared Fruits, 165.

  Sultanas, 2.

  Sweet Omelet, 50.

  Syrup, 151.


  Table of Measures, 1.

  Tapioca Pudding, 11, 12.

  Tartlets, 129-134.

  Tutti Frutti, 149.


  Vanilla and Chocolate Soufflé, 161.

  Vanilla Soufflé, 58.


  PRINTED BY
  TURNBULL AND SPEARS,
  EDINBURGH




Transcriber’s Notes

Minor errors in punctuation have been fixed.

A few spellings in the index were adjusted to match the original recipe
name.

